

GOVERNMENT OF PUNJAB 
DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE 
 
THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES 
Volume I 
Rules relating to Pay and Allowances, Leave, Joining Time and 
other General Conditions of Services 
 
PART I – MAIN RULES 
(Revised Edition) 
(As amended upto 31
st
 January, 2016) 
Issued by the authority of Government of Punjab, Department of Finance 
 CHANDIGARH 
Printed by the Controller, Printing & Stationery, Punjab at Government Press, 
S.A.S. Nagar 
Price: Rs.       

 
 
i 
 
  Preface to the Revised Edition  
          This  edition  of  the  Punjab Civil  Services  Rules,  Volume  I, Part I incorporates 
all amendments made upto the 31
st
 January, 2016.  
2.        Suggestions for making corrections and improvements may kindly be forwarded  
to the Department of Finance.   
                                                                                                       D. P. REDDY, 
                                                                                             Additional Chief Secretary,     
 Dated Chandigarh,                                                                Government of Punjab,                     
 The 18th February, 2016.                                                     Department of Finance.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                
                                                                                              
                                                                                              
   
                         
,                                     
 
  
                                                                                               
 
 
 
.                                                                                                          
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
ii 
 
PREFACE  
       This edition of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I incorporates all 
amendments made up to the 31
st
 March, 1984. 
2.    Suggestions for making corrections and improvements may kindly be forwarded 
to the Department of Finance. 
                                                                
                                              G. BALA KRISHNAN,   
 DATED CHANDIGARH                SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF  
 THE 15
TH
 MAY, 1984.                      PUNJAB, DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE. 
    
 PREFACE  
         This  is  an  up-to-date  compilation  of  the Punjab  C.S.R.  Volume  I.    All  the 
corrections  and  amendments  made  to  the  various  rules  up  to  1
st
 August  1976  have 
been incorporated in it and the old leave rules which have become obsolete have been 
omitted.  The  policy  instructions  issued  during  the  last  fifteen  years  regarding  the 
terms  of  deputation  on  foreign  service  etc.  have  been  codified  and  included  in 
Chapter X.  Changes,  where  required,  due  to  Re-organisation  of  Punjab,  upon  the       
re-designation of posts, revision of the pay scales and replacement of old major Heads 
of  Accounts  with  the  adoption  of  new  budgetary  procedure  have  been  suitably 
incorporated.   
2.      Suggestions  for  making  this  edition  more  useful,  for  correction  of  errors  and 
supplying of omissions, if any, may be sent to the Finance Department. 
  
                                                             S.P. BAGLA, 
                                                                  Commissioner for Finance &  
                                                                          Secretary to Government, Punjab, 
                                                      Finance Department. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
iii 
 
      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 
The  Punjab  Civil  Services  Rules,  issued  in  exercise  of  the  powers  conferred 
by  the  proviso  to  article  309  of  the  Constitution  of  India,  are  contained  in  three 
volumes:  
(1)  Volume  I  contains  rules  relating  to  pay  and  allowances,  leave,  passages 
and other general conditions of service. 
(2)  Volume II contains rules relating to pensions and provident funds. 
(3)  Volume III contains rules relating to travelling allowances.   
Volume  I  has  been  further  divided  into  two  parts-Part  I,  covering  the  main 
rules, and Part II, the appendices and forms. 
2.         These  rules  will  apply  in  respect  of  Government employees  belonging  to  the 
categories mentioned at rule 1.2, from the date of issue of this publication. 
3.         In  so  far  as  the  Government  employees,  whose  conditions  of  service  are 
regulated by the rules issued by the late Secretary of State under Government of India 
Act,  1935  are  concerned,  the  Fundamental  Rules,  as  amended  by  the  President  of 
India,  from  time  to  time,  will  continue  to  apply.    These  rules  are  contained  in  the 
Punjab Government Compilation of the Fundamental Rules and the Subsidiary Rules.  
These  rules  also  do  not  apply  to  members  of  the  I.A.S.  and  I.P.S.  serving  under  the 
Punjab  Government.  They  will  be  governed  by  the  rules  issued  by  the  President  of 
India in this behalf. 
4.         The  rules  in  this  Volume  are  based  mainly  on  the  existing  rules  and  orders 
contained  in  Civil  Services  Rules  (Punjab),  Volume  I,  Part  I-Main  Rules  (First 
Edition) –1941, modified in the background of the changes resulting from the partition 
of  the  Punjab  and  Constitutional  requirements.  To  avoid  over-lapping,  Chapters  XV 
and XVI of the Edition referred to above, containing the “Assent” and “Delegation 
Orders” issued under the various rules, have been brought together in Chapter XV.  
The  Punishment  and  Appeal  Rules,  previously  contained  in  Section  III  of  Chapter 
XIV, are now in the form of an appendix in Part II to this Volume. 
5.         Correction  slips  and  amendments  issued  to  the  various  rules  upto  31
st
 March 
1953, have  been  included.  Amendments  notified  subsequently  may  be  taken  as 
modifying  the  corresponding  rules  in  this  Volume.    They  will  be  re-issued  in  due 
course, as correction slips to this Volume. 

 
 
iv 
 
6.         The  opportunity  has  also  been  taken  to  include  important  orders  relating  to 
interpretation of rules, in the form of “Notes” or “Illustrations” below  the  relevant 
rule. 
7.         The  forms which  have  been  adopted  in  the  rules  in  this Volume have  been 
given a separate new “Pb. C.S.R.” (Abbreviation for  Punjab  Civil  Services  Rules) 
Series.  These will be found in Part II of this Volume. 
8.         All Government employees who notice any errors or omissions in these rules, 
are  requested  to  bring  them  to  the  notice  of  their  Heads  of  Departments,  who  will 
please  submit  their  proposal  to  the  Finance  Department,  through  the  Administrative 
Department concerned. 
                                                                                 E.N. MANGAT RAI, 
 Secretary to Government, Punjab, 
                                                                               Finance Department. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
v 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Chapter Contents Rules 
I 
Extent of Application 
1.1 
II 
Definitions 
2.1 
III General conditions of Service – 
Conditions regarding health and age :‒ 
 (i)  Medical certificate of Fitness on First Entry into 
Government service 
3.1 
(ii)  Age of entry into Government Service 3.6 
(iii) Vaccination and re-vaccination 3.9 
Whole time of a Government employee at the disposal of 
Government 
3.10 
Substantive appointment and lien 3.12 
Subscription of Provident Funds 3.18 
Date of reckoning pay and allowances 3.19 
Charge of Office 3.22 
Continuous absence from duty 3.25 
Retirement 3.26 
IV 
Pay 
General 4.1 
Fixation of initial pay 4.4 
Fixation of initial pay under the Revised Pay Structure 4.4A 
Increments 4.7 
Assured Career Progression Scheme 4.8 
Transfer from a higher to lower grade or from a higher 
stage to a lower stage 
4.11 
Pay of officiating Government Employees 4.13 
Personal Pay 4.18 
Pay of temporary posts 4.20 
Combination of appointments 4.22 
V Additions to pay  
I- Compensatory Allowances 
General 5.1 
Compensatory allowances, other than a house rent 
allowance  
5.3 
House-rent allowance 5.5 

 
 
vi 
 
Chapter Contents Rules 
 
Conveyance allowance 5.6 
Other compensatory allowances 5.8 
Compensatory allowance during joining time 5.9 
II-Rent of Government residences 
General 5.13 
Capital cost of buildings and assessment of rents 
(i)    Capital cost of a Residence 5.15 
(ii)   Standard rent 5.23 
Conditions of tenancy and rent payable by Government 
employees 
5.29 
Rent-free accommodation and waiving or reducing the 
amount of rent 
5.35 
Rent for Special Services 5.44 
Classification of residences 5.45 
General rules and instruction regarding allotment of 
residence 
5.46 
III ‒ Compensations Omitted 
IV ‒ Honoraria and Fees 
Honoraria 5.55 
Fees 5.57 
VI Deputation out of India 
6.1 
VII Dismissal, removal and Suspension 
Cessation of pay and allowances on removal or dismissal 7.1 
Allowances during period of suspension 7.2 
Allowance on reinstatement 7.3, 7.3-A 
and 7.3-B. 
Leave to a Government employee under Suspension 7.4 
Forfeiture of service on resignation 7.5 
VIII Leave 
Section I – General conditions and extent of application 
 I ‒Service counting for leave 8.1 
II ‒Application for and grant of leave 
(1)  General 8.3 
(2)  Application for leave ‒ 
      (a)   To whom to be submitted 8.4 
      (b)   Procedure in case of leave on medical certificate 
Instructions for Medical Officers 8.6 

 
 
vii 
 
Chapter Contents Rules 
 
Medical certificate for Government employees 8.13 
(3)   Grant of leave 
(a)   General 8.15 
(b)   Leave beyond the date of retirement and      
encashment of  leave   
8.21 
(c)  Encashment of earned leave alongwith leave travel  
       concession while in service 
8.22 
(4)   Authorities competent to grant leave 8.23 
III – Commencement and expiry of leave and combination of holidays 
with leave 
(1)    Commencement and expiry of leave 8.25 
(2)    Combination of holidays with leave 8.26 
IV – Departure on leave 8.34 
 V – Acceptance of employment during leave 8.41 
VI – Recall from leave 8.42 
VII –Return from leave  
(1)    Before expiry of leave 8.43 
(2)    Return from leave on medical certificate 8.44 
(3)    Report of return from leave 8.45 
VIII –Overstayal of leave 8.47 
IX – Leave salary  
(1)   General  8.48 
(2)   Payment of leave salary 8.49 
 X – Leave Accounts 8.50 
XI – Extent and application  
(1)  Application of Revised Leave Rules 8.52 
(2) Periods of off-duty which are not treated as Regular Leave  
(a)    Vacation 8.59 
(b)    Causal and quarantine leave 8.60 
Section-III  Revised Leave Rules  
Definitions 8.113 
General Rules and Conditions 8.114 
Part-A. Leave to Government employees in Permanent employ  
General Provisions –   
 (i)  Earned Leave 8.116 
(ii)  Half Pay Leave, Commuted leave and „Leave not  
       due‟ 
8.119 
(iii)  Extraordinary Leave 8.121 
Leave Salary 8.122 

 
 
viii 
 
Chapter Contents Rules 
 
Additional kind of leave in special circumstances    
 
 (i)    Special Disability Leave 8.124 
(ii)    Study Leave 8.126 
(iii)   Maternity Leave and Hospital Leave 8.127 
(iv)   Paternity Leave 8.128 
 (v)   Adoption Leave 8.128-A 
(vi)   Child Care Leave 8.128-B 
Leave  to  Government  employees  on  Deputation  out  of 
India 
8.130 
Part-B.  Leave to probationers and apprentices  
              Leave to Probationers 8.131 
              Leave to Apprentices 8.132 
Part-C. Leave  earned  by  temporary  and officiating  service,  service 
which   is   not   continuous   and   part-time   service   or   service 
remunerated wholly or Partially by the payment of honoraria or 
daily wages   
Leave to Government employees not in permanent employ  
  (i) Earned  leave,  half  pay leave,  commuted  leave  and 
„Leave not due‟ 
8.133 
  (ii)    Extraordinary leave  8.137 
 (iii)    Maternity Leave 8.137-A 
 (iv)    Special Disability Leave 8.137-C 
  (v)    Hospital leave 8.138 
 (vi)    Terminal leave 8.138-A 
 (vii)    Leave beyond the date of retirement  and       
           encashment of  leave   
8.139 
(viii)   Leave salary 8.140 
Leave  admissible to part-time Government employees and Government 
employees whose service is not continuous  
Law Officers    
  (i)     Assistant Legal Remembrances 8.141 
 (ii)     District Attorneys and Government Pleaders 8.142 
 (iii)    Editor and Reporters of the Indian Law Reports 8.143 
Departmental Sub-Registrar 8.144 
Leave admissible to Government employees remunerated 
wholly or partially by the payment of honoraria or daily 
wages 
8.145 
Leave rules applicable to permanent salaried industrial 
employees in the Punjab Government, Group „C‟ and  
Group „D‟ 
8.148 

 
 
ix 
 
Chapter Contents Rules 
 
Leave rules applicable to officiating temporary industrial 
Employees of Punjab Government Press,  Group „C‟ and 
Group „D‟ 
8.149 
IX Joining time 
Conditions under which admissible 9.1 
Calculation of joining time 9.5 
Pay during joining time 9.15 
Overstayal and extension of Joining time 9.18 
Joining time to persons not in Government service on 
joining the Government service and on reversion from it. 
9.20 
X Foreign Service and Deputation in India 
General conditions for Foreign Service 10.2 
Pay and joining time 10.4 
Pension and leave salary 10.6 
Rate  of  contribution payable on  account  of  pension  and 
leave salary 
10.8 
Time limit for payment of contributions 10.9 
Interest on overdue contributions 10.10 
Remission of interest 10.11 
Leave while on Foreign Service 10.13 
Reversion from Foreign Service 10.18 
Recoveries in the cases of additions to regular Establishment 10.20 
General conditions of deputation and deputation allowance 10.21 
Pay on deputation to Universities, Corporations, Local 
Bodies and other Corporate Bodies 
10.22 
How to treat deputation allowance 10.23 
Restriction on grant of extraordinary concessions 10.24 
Period of deputation 10.25 
Travelling Allowance and daily allowance during deputation 10.26 
House Rent Allowance during Deputation 10.27 
Conditions to be observed while sanctioning the cases of 
Deputation or Foreign Service 
10.28 
XI Service under Local Funds 
11.1 
XII Record of Service 
Maintenance of Service Record/Service Books of 
Government employees 
12.1-12.5 

 
 
x 
 
 
Chapter Contents Rules 
XIII Passages   
Omitted. 
XIV 
 
Classification  of  Services  (including  method  of  recruitment  and 
appointment  thereto  and  number  and  character  of  posts),  Conduct 
and Discipline and Punishment and Appeals 
Section I ‒Classification of Services 
(a)  General 14.1 
(b)  State Services Group „A‟ and Group „B‟, and  Specialist 
Services 
14.5 
(c)  Other Services 14.7 
Section II :‒ Conduct and Discipline 14.8 
Section III:‒ Punishment and Appeals 14.9 
XV 
 
Authorities which exercise the powers of competent 
authority under the various rules 
15.1 

1 
                             THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES 
                                               VOLUME I PART I 
CHAPTER I 
EXTENT OF APPLICATION 
 
         1.1. These  rules,  which  have  been  issued  by  the  Governor  of  Punjab,  under 
proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution of India (see Appendix 1), may be called the 
Punjab Civil Services Rules. They shall come into force from the 1
st
 April, 1953. 
         1.2.  (1)  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  rule  1.4  infra  or  in  any  other  rule  or 
rules these rules shall apply to all Government employees belonging to the categories 
mentioned below, who are under the administrative control of the Punjab Government 
and whose pay is debitable to the Consolidated Fund of the State of Punjab: 
(1)     Members of State Services, Group „A‟ and Group „B‟; 
(2)     Members of State Services, Group „C‟; 
(3)     Members of State Services, Group „D‟; 
(4)     Holders of Special Posts; and 
  (5)    any other  Government  employee  or  class  of  Government  employees  to   
whom  the  competent  authority  may,  by  general  or  special  order,  make 
them applicable: 
         Provided that the rules in Part I-Pensions and the Punjab General Provident Fund 
Rules contained  in  Volume-II  of  these  rules  called  the  Punjab Civil  Services  Rules, 
Volume-II shall  not  apply  to  the  Government  employees  who  are  appointed  to  the 
posts mentioned in categories (1) to (5) above on or after the 1
st
 January, 2004. They 
shall be covered by new „Defined Contributory Pension Scheme‟ to be notified by the 
State Government. 
           Note  1.–Unless  stated  to  the  contrary  in  any  rule  or  rules  or  the  contrary  is  apparent 
from the context, the term “Government employee” includes also a temporary or an officiating 
Government employee. 
           Note  2.–The  Speaker of the  Legislative  Assembly  has agreed under  Article 187 (3) of 
the Constitution that until a law is made by the Legislature of the State under Article 187 (3) of   
the   Constitution  or  rules  are  framed  by  the  Governor  in  consultation  with  the   Speaker  
of  the  Legislative  Assembly  under  clause  (3)  of  Article  187  of  Constitution  of  India,  these 
rules  and  amendments  thereto,  if  any  (after  prior  consent  of  the  Speaker), shall  apply  to  the 
Secretariat staff of the Punjab Legislative Assembly. 
           Note 3.–The Chief  Justice  of  the  Punjab  High Court has agreed to the application of 
these  rules  as  amended  from  time  to  time  in  case  of  officers  and  employees  of  the  Punjab 
High Court. 
 
            

2 
[1.2-1.5] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. I] 
           Note   4.–The   Chairman,   Punjab   Public   Service   Commission   has   agreed   to   the 
application of these rules as amended from time to time, in the case of officers and employees 
of the Punjab Public Service Commission. 
          (2)  Government  employees  to  whom  these  rules  apply  shall  continue  to  be 
governed  by  these  rules  while  on  temporary  transfer  to  another  state  Government  or 
Central  Government  or  while  on  foreign  service  within  India,  unless  it  be  otherwise 
provided  in  these  rules. In  the  case  of  Government  employees  on  foreign  service 
outside India (including service with United Nations Agencies within or outside India) 
or on temporary transfer to the Armed forces of the Union, these rules shall apply only 
to  the  extent  provided  in  the  terms  and  conditions  of  foreign  service  or  temporary 
transfer, as the case may be.  
         1.3.   When   in   the   opinion   of   the   competent   authority,   special   provisions 
inconsistent with these rules are required with reference to any particular post or any 
conditions   of   service,  that   authority   may,   not   withstanding   anything   otherwise 
contained in these rules, and subject to the provisions of clause  (2) of Article  310 of 
the  Constitution  of  India  (see  Appendix 1),  provide  agreement  with  the person 
appointed  to  such  post  for  any  matters  in  respect  of  which  in  the  opinion  of  that 
authority special provisions are required to be made: Provided that in every agreement 
so made it shall be provided that in respect of any matter for which no provision has 
been made in the agreement, provisions of these rules shall apply. 
         1.4. These rules shall not apply to – 
  (i)  any  Government  employee  between  whom  and  the  Government,  a 
specific contract or agreement subsists in respect of any matter dealt with 
herein to the extent upto which specific provision is made in the contract 
or agreement (see rule 1.3 above); 
 (ii)  any  person  for  whose  appointment  and  conditions  of  service  special 
provision is made by or under any law for the time being in force; and 
  (iii)  any Government employee or class of Government employees to whom 
the competent authority may, by general or special order, direct that they 
shall  not apply  in  whole  or  in  part.  One  of  such  classes  of  Government 
employees  is  that  employed  only  occasionally or  which  is subject to          
discharge  at  one  month‟s  notice  or  less.  A  list  of  such  Government 
employees is given in Appendix 2.       
           Note.–Model form of agreement for use in the case of Government employees engaged 
on contract is given in Form Pb. C.S.R. No.1. 
         1.5. If any doubt arises as to whether these rules apply to any person or not, the 
decision shall lie with the competent authority. 

3 
 [Chap. I]  EXTENT OF APPLICATION [1.6-1.8] 
         1.6.  Nothing  in these  rules  shall  operate  to  deprive  any  person  of  any  right  or, 
privilege to which he is entitled by or under any law or by the terms of his agreement. 
         1.7.  Unless otherwise  provided  in  any  rule or rules,  a  Government employee‟s 
claim  to  pay  and  allowances  shall  be  regulated  by  the  rules  in  force  at  the  time  in 
respect  of  which  the  pay  and  allowances  are  earned,  to  traveling  allowance  by  the 
rules  in  force  at  the  time  the  journeys  in  respect  of  which  they  are  made  are 
undertaken, to leave by the rules applicable to him at the time the leave is applied for 
and  granted; and  to  pension  by  the  rules  in  force  applicable  to  him  at  the  time  when 
the  Government  employee  retires  or  is  discharged  from  the  service  of  Government. 
See also rule 1.1 (b) of Volume II of these rules. 
         1.8. The power of interpreting, changing and relaxing these rules is vested in the 
Department of Finance. 
         Note  1.–Communications  regarding  the  interpretation  and alteration  of  these  rules 
should  be  addressed  to  the  Department  of  Finance  through  the  Administrative  Department 
concerned. 
          Note 2.–Where the Department of Finance is satisfied that the operation of any of these 
rules regulating the conditions of service of State Government employees or any class of such 
Government employees, causes undue hardship in any particular case, it may by order dispense 
with  or  relax  the  requirements  of  that  rule  to  such  extent  and  subject  to  such  conditions  as  it 
may consider necessary for dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner. 
           The  expression  „State  Government employees‟  means all persons  whose  conditions of 
service may be regulated by rules made by the Governor of Punjab under the proviso to Article 
309 of the Constitution.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
 
      CHAPTER II 
                                         DEFINITIONS 
          2.1.  Unless  there  be  something  repugnant  in  the  subject  or  context,  the  terms 
defined in this chapter are used in these rules in the sense here explained. 
          2.2. Accountant-General  means  the  head  of  the  office  of  audit  and  accounts 
subordinate to the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, who keeps the accounts 
of  the  Punjab  State  and  exercises  audit  functions  in  relation  to  those  accounts  on 
behalf of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
           Note.–This definition covers also the term “Audit Officer”. 
          2.3.  Active  service  for  the  purpose  of  pension, includes  besides  time  spent  on 
duty in India:– 
 (i)   Leave of all kinds except extraordinary leave other than that extraordinary   
leave counted towards increment under rule 4.9(b). 
  (ii)   Omitted. 
 (iii)  The period of absence  from  India  of a  Government employee deputed  or  
detained out of India on duty. 
Note.–Disability leave under rule 8.124 is included in “Active Service.‟ 
         2.4. Actual   Traveling   expenses   means   the   actual   cost   of   transporting   a 
Government  employee  with  his  domestic  servants  and  personal  luggage,  including 
charges for ferry and other tolls, if paid, and for carriage of camp equipment, if such is 
necessary.  It  does  not  include  charges  for  hotels  or  travellers‟  bungalows  or 
refreshments or for the carriage of stores or conveyances or for presents to coachmen 
and the like; or any allowance for such incidental losses or expenses as the breakage 
of  crockery,  wear  and  tear  of  furniture  and  the  employment  of  additional  domestic 
servants and the like. 
          2.5. Age.–The  day  on  which  a  Government  employee  retires  or is  retired  or is 
discharged or is allowed to resign from service as the case may be, shall be treated as 
his last working day. The date of death shall also be treated as working day: 
          Provided that in the case of a Government employee who is retired prematurely 
or  who  retires  voluntarily  under  sub-rule  (1)  or  sub-rule  (2)  of  rule 3  of the Punjab 
Civil  Services  (Premature  Retirement)  Rules,  1975,  as  the  case  may  be,  the  date  of 
retirement shall be treated as a non working day. 
         Note 1.–Every person newly appointed to a service or a post under Government should 
at the time of appointment, be asked to produce birth certificate issued by the Registrar, Birth 
and Deaths, and in the absence of such a certificate, he should furnish either an attested copy 
of  Matriculation  Certificate  or  an  affidavit  in  proof of correctness of the date of birth. The  

5 
[Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS  [2.5-2.11] 
actual date  or  the  assumed  date  determined  under Note  2  below  should  be  recorded  in  the 
History  of Service,  Service Book,  or  any  other  record  that  may  be  kept  in  respect  of  the 
Government  Employee‟s  service  under  Government  and  once  recorded,  it  cannot  be  altered 
except  in  the  case  of clerical  error,  without  the  previous  orders  of  Government  (see  also 
Annexure „A‟ to this Chapter).                  
        Note 2.–(a) If a Government employee is only unable to state his exact date of birth but 
can state the year or year and month of birth, 1
st
 July, or the 16
th
 of the month respectively may 
be treated as the date of his birth. 
           (b)  If  a  Government  employee  is  only  able  to  state  his  approximate  age,  his  date  of 
birth,   may   be   assumed   to   be corresponding   date   after   deducing   the   number   of   years 
representing his age from his date of appointment. 
           (c) When a  Government  employee   who  first  entered  as  a   military  employee  is 
subsequently  employed  in  a  Civil  Department,  the  date  of  birth  for  Civil  employment  should 
be the date stated by him at the time of attestation or if at the time of attestation he stated only 
his age, the date of birth should be deduced with reference to that age, according to the method 
indicated in sub-para (b) above. 
          Note 3.–The date of birth given by an employee, in his application form, submitted to a 
recruiting  agency viz., the  Punjab  Public  Service  Commission  or  the  Punjab  Subordinate 
Services  Selection  Board  or  the  Departmental  Selection  Committee  as  the  case  may  be,  shall 
be treated as final and no change in it shall be allowed after entry into Government service. 
           For administrative  instructions  in  respect  of  alterations  in  the  date  of  birth, see 
Annexure „A‟ to this Chapter. 
          2.6. Apprentice means a person deputed for training in a trade or business with 
a  view to employment in Government service, who draws pay at monthly rates from 
the Government during such training, but is not employed in or against a substantive 
vacancy in the cadre of a department. 
          2.7. Omitted. 
          2.8. Omitted.           
          2.9. Cadre means the strength of a service or a part of a service sanctioned as a 
separate unit. 
         2.10. Camp equipage means the apparatus for moving a camp. 
           Note.–“Camp  equipage”  is  essentially  different  from  “Camp  equipment”.  The  latter 
form  includes  everything  necessary  to  a  Government  employee  to  enable  him  to  live  in  a 
Camp. 
         2.11.   Camp   equipment   means   tents   and   the   requisites   for   pitching   and 
furnishing  them  or,  where  tents  are  not  carried,  such  articles  of  camp  furniture  as  it 
may be necessary in the interests of the public service for a Government employee to 
take with him on tour. 

6 
 
 
[2.13-2.17] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
           2.12. Omitted. 
           2.13.  Compensatory  allowance  means an  allowance  granted  to  meet  personal 
expenditure  necessitated  by  the  special  circumstances  in  which  duty  is  performed.  It 
includes  traveling  allowance,  dearness  allowance  but  does  not  include  a  sumptuary 
allowance nor the grant of a free passage by sea to or from any place outside India. 
           Note.– See the explanation and note 1 under rule 2.52. 
           2.14.  Competent  authority  in  relation  to  the  exercise  of  any  power  means  the 
Administrative  Department concerned of Government acting in consultation with the 
Department of Finance, or any other authority to which such power may be delegated 
by or under these rules. A list of authorities which exercise the powers of a competent 
authority under the various rules is given in Chapter XV. 
           Note.– Omitted. 
          2.15.  Day  means  a  calendar  day,  beginning  and  ending  at  midnight;  but  an 
absence  from  headquarters  which  does  not  exceed  twenty-four  hours,  shall  be 
reckoned for all purposes as one day, at whatever hours the absence begins or ends.      
          2.16. Duty (a) Duty includes: – 
                 (1) service  as  a  probationer  or  apprentice,  provided  that  service  as  a 
probationer  is  followed  by  confirmation;  provided further  that,  in  the 
case of apprentice, on confirmation either in the post for which he was 
undergoing  apprenticeship  or  in  any  other  post,  he  cannot  count  his 
apprentice   period   for   leave   as   if   it   had   been   service   rendered 
substantively in a permanent post. 
                  (2)  Joining time; and 
         (b)  A Government employee is also treated as on duty under the circumstances 
specified in the schedule to this Chapter (See pages 16 to 19).  
          Note.–No leave of any kind can be treated as duty for the purpose of any rule unless the 
contrary is expressly stated therein.  
         2.17. Family means a Government employee‟s wife or husband, as the case may 
be, residing with the Government employee and legitimate children and step children 
residing with and wholly dependent upon the Government employee. Except in rules 
2.59,  2.82,  2.83,  2.86  and  2.87  of  the  Punjab  Civil  Services  Rules,  Volume  III 
(Travelling  Allowance  Rules),  it  includes  in  addition  parents,  sisters  and  minor 
brothers,  if residing  with  and  wholly  dependent  upon  the  Government  employee  and 
also  the widowed  sisters  residing  with  and wholly dependent upon the Government  

7 
[Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS [2.17-2.21] 
employee: provided their father is  either not alive  or is  himself wholly dependent on 
the Government employee. 
           Note  1.–The  term  “legitimate  children”  in  this  rule does  not  include  adopted  children 
except those adopted under the Hindu Law. 
                                 Note  2.–The  term  “child”  or “children”  used  in  this  rule  includes  major  sons  and 
married daughters including  widowed daughters so long as they are residing  with and wholly 
dependent on the Government employee. 
           Note 3.–Not more than one wife is included in the term family for the purpose of these 
rules. 
       Note  4.–An  adopted  child  shall  be  considered  to  be  a  legitimate  child,  if  under  the 
personal  law  of  the  Government  employee,  adoption  is  legally  recognised  as  conferring  on  it 
the status of a natural child. 
                  Note  5.–A person in receipt of a  gross pension not exceeding the  prescribed minimum 
pension of Rs. 3500 per mensem plus dearness relief thereon, but otherwise dependent on and       
residing  with  the  Government  employee, shall  be  considered  a  member  of  his/her  family  for 
the purposes of rules 5.3 and 5.5 of these rules.  
         2.18.  Fee  means  a  recurring  or non-recurring  payment  to  a  Government 
employee from a source other than the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated 
Fund  of  a  State  (including  the  Punjab  State),  or  the  Consolidated  Fund  of  a  Union 
Territory whether made directly to the Government employee or indirectly through the 
intermediary of Government, but does not include: – 
 (a) unearned income  such as income  from property; dividends,  and interest on 
securities; and 
 (b) income from literary, cultural artistic, scientific or technological efforts and 
income from participation in sports activities as amateur. 
          2.19.  Department  of  Finance  means  the  Department  of  Finance  of  the  Punjab 
Government. 
          2.20.  First  appointment  includes  the  appointment  of  a  person  not  at  the  time 
holding  any  appointment  under  Government,  even  though  he  may  have  previously 
held such an appointment.  
          2.20-A. Omitted. 
          2.21. Foreign service means service in which a Government employee receives 
his  pay with the  sanction of Government from any source other than the revenues of 
the Union or State Government or a Union Territory. 

8 
 
 
[2.23-2.28] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
          2.22.  Omitted. 
          2.23.  General  revenues  include  the  revenues  of  the Union  Government  or  of 
State Government and exclude the revenues of a Local Fund. 
          2.24. Government   means   the   Punjab   Government   in   the Administrative 
Department. 
          2.25.   Head   of   Department   means   the   authority   shown   in   column   5   of  
Appendix-C  to the  Punjab  Budget  Manual  in  respect  of  the  Government  employees 
whose  pay  is  charged  to  the  corresponding  head  of  account  in  column  2  of  that 
Appendix, with the following exceptions: 
(1)   Governor  is  Head  of  the  Department  with  respect  to  himself  and  his 
personal staff. 
  (2)   Commissioners are Heads of Departments with respect to the Government 
employees  other  than  the  members  of  the  Indian  Administrative  Service 
and  the  Punjab  Civil  Service  whose  pay  is  charged  to  the  group  heads 
“Commissioners” and “District Administration.” 
 (3)    The  Conservators  of  Forests  are  Heads  of  Departments  for  all  ministerial 
Government   employees,   Forest   Rangers,   Deputy   Rangers,   Foresters, 
Forest Guards and Group „D‟ Government employees and other employees 
serving in their circles. 
(4)   Any  other  authority  specially  appointed  by  the  competent  authority  to 
exercise the powers of a Head of Department. 
2.26.  Heads  of  Offices  means  the  authorities defined as  Disbursing Officers  in 
rule 2.16 to the Punjab Budget Manual or any other Government employee declared to 
be the head of an office by competent authority. 
2.27. The Headquarters of a Government employee are:– 
     (a)   if  he  is  attached  to  the  Secretariat  offices  of the  Government;  the 
headquarters for the time being of the Government; and 
(b)   in other cases, the station which has been declared to be his headquarters 
by competent authority or, in the absence of such declaration, the station 
where the records of his office are kept. 
2.28. Hill station means any place which a competent authority may declare to 
be a hill station. 
  

9 
[Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS [2.29-2.33] 
2.29. Holiday means:– 
 (a)  a  holiday prescribed  or notified  by or under section 25 of the  Negotiable 
Instruments Act, 1881; and 
 (b)  In relation to any particular office a day on which such office is ordered, 
by notification in the Gazette or otherwise to be closed for the transaction 
of Government business without reserve or qualification. 
  Note.–This term does not include “local holiday” which may be granted at the discretion 
of  Head  of  Offices:  provided  there  are  no  arrears  of  work,  nor  such  merely  discretionary 
holidays as the last Saturday of each month. 
  2.30.  Honorarium  means  a  recurring  or non-recurring  payment  granted  to  a 
Government employee from the Consolidated Fund of India or the Consolidated Fund 
of a State (including the Punjab State) or the Consolidated Fund of a Union Territory 
as remuneration for special work of an occasional or intermittent character. 
  Note  1.–No  honorarium  should  be  paid  in  respect  of  any  work  which  can  fairly  be 
regarded as part of the legitimate duties of the Government employees concerned. 
                                 Note  2.–It  is  one  of  the  liabilities of  Government  employees  to  have  to  work  outside 
office  hours in exceptional  times and circumstances. No honoraria  should ordinarily be  given 
on this account, but continuous working out of office hours may justify a claim to honoraria or 
to special pay. 
           Note 3.–No honoraria should be paid to Government employees for attending meetings 
of boards and committees financed wholly or partly from Government revenues. 
           Note  4.–No  honorarium  should  be  granted  to Group  „A‟  and  Group  „B‟ officers 
engaged  on  work  in  connection  with  the  setting  up  of  companies,  corporations,  etc.  which 
forms a part of their normal duties even if they work beyond office hours. 
          2.31. Omitted. 
          2.32. Joining time means the time allowed to a Government employee in which 
to join a new post or to travel to or from a station to which he is posted. 
          2.33. „Leave on half pay‟ means leave on salary equal to half pay, as regulated 
by rule 8.122. 
    
 
 

10 
 
 
[2.34-2.36] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
   2.34.  Leave  salary  means  the  monthly  amount  paid  by Government  to  a 
Government employee on leave as determined in Rule 8.122. 
   Note  1.–The  leave  salary  of  a  military  officer,  who  is  granted  rent-free  quarters  and 
thereby foregoes  lodging  allowance  in  lieu  thereof,  shall,  if  he  given  up  such  quarter  before 
going to leave, be calculated as though he  had been drawing during the period of occupation, 
the lodging allowance to which he would otherwise have been entitled. 
Note 2. Omitted. 
Note 3. Omitted.  
Note 4. Omitted. 
           Note 5. Omitted. 
           Note 6. Omitted. 
           Note 7. Omitted. 
    Note  8.–For  interpretation  of  the  expression  „pay, which  the  Government  employee 
would have drawn if on duty in India‟, see note 4 below rule 6.2. 
Note 9.–A Civil Officer undergoing military training is not a Military Officer as defined 
in  rule  2.39.  Consequently,  in  calculating  leave  salary  in  this  case,  the  pay  which  he  would 
have  drawn  during  the  period  of  training,  had  he not  proceeded  on  training,  should  be  taken 
into  account.  Similarly,  a  civil  Government  employee  belonging  to  the  Indian  Army  Reserve 
of  Officers  when  called  to  Army  Service  or  such  a  Government  employee  belonging  to  the 
Indian Territorial Force, while undergoing training with such a force is not a “Military Officer” 
as defined in rule 2.39 and in his case “pay” as defined in rule 2.44 (a) does not include „rank 
pay‟  (received  during  the  period  of  Service  in  the  Army).    In  such  cases,  the  pay  which  the 
Government employee would have received, if he had not been called to Army service and not 
the „rank pay‟ actually drawn during that period should be taken into account for purposes of 
calculating leave salary under this rule. 
    Note 10.–Also see rule 8.122 and note thereunder. 
         2.35. Lien means  the right or title  of a Government employee to hold a regular 
post, whether permanent or temporary, either immediately or on the termination of the 
period of absence. 
   2.36. Local Fund means:– 
           (a)  revenues  administered by bodies  which  by law or rule having the force  of        
law   come   under   the   control   of   Government,   whether   in   regard   to 
proceedings generally or to specific matters such as the sanctioning of their 

11 
[Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS [2.36-2.41] 
                   budgets,  sanction  to  the  creation  or  filling  up  of  particular  posts,  or  the 
enactment of leave, pension or similar rules; and 
(b)   the revenues  of  any  body  which  may  be  specially  notified  by  the 
competent authority as such. 
   2.37. Omitted. 
   2.38. Military Commissioned  Officer means  a  commissioned officer other than 
a departmental officer. It does not include a warrant officer. 
   2.39. Military officer means any officer falling within the definition of Military 
Commissioned Officer, or included in rule 2.38 above, or any warrant officer. 
   2.40.  Ministerial  employee  means  a  Government  employee  belonging  to  State 
Service Group  „C‟,  whose duties   are   entirely   clerical   and   any   other   class of 
Government  employees  specially  defined  as  such  by  general  or  special  order  of  the 
competent authority. 
   Note.–Those  members  of Group  „B‟  service whose  duties  are  predominantly  clerical 
shall be classed as Ministerial employees for the purpose of this rule. 
   2.41. Month means a calendar month. In calculating a period expressed in terms 
of  months  and  days,  complete  calendar  months  should  be  calculated  and  the  odd 
number of days added thereto. Illustrations;   
 (a) to calculate 3 months and 20 days on and from the 25th January the following  
      method should be adopted:– 
 
 Y M D 
25th January to 31st January                                      0 0  7 
February to April                                                      0 3  0 
1st May to 13th May                                                   0 0 13 
 0 3 20 
           
      (b) the period commencing on 30
th
 January and ending with the 2
nd
 March,  should 
be deemed as 1 month and 4 days as indicated below :–    
                                                                              
 Y M D 
30th January to 31st January                                      0 0 2 
February  0 1 0 
1st March to 2nd  March                                                   0 0 2 
 0 1 4 
    

12 
 
 
[2.42-2.49] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
2.42. Officiate.–A Government employee officiates in a post when he performs 
the duties of a post on which another person holds a lien. A competent authority may, 
if it thinks fit, appoint a Government employee to officiate in a vacant post on which 
no other Government employee holds a lien. 
          2.43. Omitted. 
          2.44. “pay” means– 
          (a) the basic pay, that is the  amount drawn monthly by a Government employee 
in the scale of pay of the post held by him, or to which he is entitled by reason of his 
position in a cadre; and           
          (b) includes any other emoluments which may specifically be classed as part of 
pay by the competent authority. 
 
          2.45. Pension.–Except when the term, “pension” is used in contradistinction to 
“Gratuity”, pension includes Gratuity. 
2.46. Permanent post means a post carrying a definite rate of pay and sanctioned 
without limit of time. 
 
 2.47. Personal pay means additional pay granted to a Government employee:–  
             (a)   to save him from a loss of substantive pay in respect of a permanent post     
other  than  a  tenure  post  due  to  a  revision  of  pay  or  to  any  reduction  of 
such  substantive pay otherwise than as a disciplinary measure; or 
            (b)   in exceptional circumstances, on other personal considerations. 
Note.–No case will be entertained which is not of an entirely exceptional character; and 
in submitting cases for the grant of personal pay, this should be carefully borne in mind. 
2.48.  Presumptive  pay  of  a  post.–When  used  with  reference  to  any  particular 
Government  employee,  means  the  pay  to  which  he  would  be  entitled  if  he  held  the 
post substantively and were performing its duties; but it does not include special pay 
unless  the  Government  employee  performs  or  discharges  the  work  or  responsibility, 
on consideration of which the special pay was sanctioned. 
          2.49. Probationer means  a  Government employee employed  on probation in or 
against  a  substantive  vacancy  in  the  cadre  of  a  department.  This  term  does  not, 
however, cover a Government employee who holds substantively a permanent post in 
a cadre and is merely appointed “on probation” to another post. 
               Note  1.–The status  of  a  probationer  is  to  be  considered  as  having  the  attributes  of  a 
substantive status except where the rules prescribe otherwise. 

13 
  [Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS [2.49-2.52] 
          Note  2.–No  person  appointed  substantively  to  a  permanent  post  in  a cadre  is  a 
probationer unless definite conditions of probation have been attached to his appointment, such 
as the condition that he must remain on probation pending the passing of certain examinations.       
          Note  3.–The provisions of this rule and note 2 above are to be taken as complementary 
and  not  as  mutually  exclusive.  Taken  together,  they  contain  the  essence  of  the  tests  for 
determining when a Government employee should be regarded as a probationer, or so merely 
„on probation‟ irrespective of whether  he  is  already  a  permanent  Government  employee  or  is 
merely a Government employee without a lien on any permanent post. While a probationer is 
one appointed in or against a post substantively vacant with definite conditions of probation, a 
person  on  probation  is  one  appointed  to  a  post  (not  necessarily  vacant  substantively)  for 
determining  his  fitness  for  eventual  substantive  appointment  to  that  post.  There  is  nothing  in 
this  rule  to  prevent  a  Government  employee  substantive  in  one  cadre  from  being appointed 
(either   through   selection   by   a   departmental   committee   or   as   a   result   of   competitive 
examinations through the Punjab Public Service Commission) as a probationer in or against a 
post  born  on  another  cadre,  when  definite  conditions  of  probation  such as  the  passing  of 
departmental examinations are prescribed. In such a case the Government employee should be 
treated as a  probationer and (subject to specific  rules,  if any, to the  contrary) allowed only as 
initial and subsequent pay the rates of pay prescribed for the probationary period, irrespective 
of whether these rates are actually included in or shown separately from the time-scales of the 
services concerned. The case of Departmental candidates of the same department promoted by 
selection  is,  however,  different.  If  the  Department  of  the  Government  of  Punjab concerned 
consider it expedient, these „promoted‟ men may properly be put „on probation‟ for a period to 
see if they make good in the actual work of the post to which they are promoted and have liens 
retained  for  them  on  their  former  posts  meanwhile  to  provide  for  their  possible  reversion; 
whatever the departmental arrangements be to test their capacity etc., during the „on probation‟ 
period their initial pay should be fixed under the operation of the normal rules regulating pay 
fixation. 
          2.50. Public conveyance means a train, steamer or other conveyance which plies 
regularly,   though   not   necessarily   at   fixed   intervals,   a   regular   course   for   the 
conveyance  of passengers and  does  not deviate therefrom according to the  wishes of 
passengers. Cabs, cars and horses are not regarded as public conveyances. 
          2.51. Omitted. 
          2.52. Special pay means an addition, of the nature of pay, to the emoluments of 
a post or of Government employees, granted in consideration of:– 
                   (a)   the specially arduous nature of duties; 
                 (b) a specific addition  to  the  work  or  responsibility  and  includes  non-  
practising allowance granted to doctors in lieu of private practice.       
         Explanation.–The   circumstances   which   justify   the   grant   to   a   Government 
employee of special pay are entirely different in character from those which justify the 
grant  of  a  compensatory  allowance, a  difference  emphasised  in  the  definition   of  

14 
 
 
[2.52-2.55] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
those terms  embodied  in  rules  2.13  and  2.52.  These  definitions  should  be  strictly 
construed  and  an  exact compliance  required  with  the  conditions  stated  in  them  as 
antecedent to the  grant of either special pay or compensatory allowance.  There  is  no 
necessary  inter-dependence  between  special  pay  and  compensatory  allowance.  It  is 
not the intention of the rules either that where the cost of living would justify the grant 
to  a  Government  employee  of  a  compensatory  allowance,  he  should  be  rendered 
ineligible  for  such  allowance,  because  he  has  already  been  granted  special  pay  in 
recognition  of  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  his  post,  or  that  if  the  attachment  of 
special  pay  to  a  post  is  justified  under  the  terms  of  the  rules,  it  should  be  subject  to 
reduction  because  for  reasons  essentially  different,  a  compensatory  allowance  as 
defined in rule 2.13 is subsequently granted. 
           Note 1.–The reasons for the grant of a special pay and compensatory allowance should 
be recorded in the  sanctioning order so that their classification may be duly  watched in audit. 
In  cases  in  which  an  official  record  in  an  open letter  is  considered  undesirable,  it  should  be 
possible to communicate the reason confidentially to the Accountant-General. 
           Note 2.– Omitted. 
           Note  3.–A  provision  in  the  contract  of  a  Government  employee  appointed to  a 
particular  post that  he  should  “also  do  all  things  that  may  be  required  of  him”  does  not 
contemplate  his  being  required  to  perform  onerous  additional  duties  in  another  post  without 
remuneration.  
          2.53. Sphere of duty of a Government employee is the local area outside which 
he cannot travel without the special orders of competent authority. The sphere of duty 
of  Heads  of  Department  other  than  Commissioners  is  the  Punjab;  of  Commissioners 
their respective divisions; and of other Government employees as may be ordered by 
competent authority. 
         2.54. Subsistence grant means a monthly grant made to a Government employee 
who is not in receipt of pay or leave salary. 
        2.55.  Substantive  pay  means  the  pay,  other  than  special  pay,  personal  pay  or 
emoluments classed as pay by the competent authority under rule 2.44 (b), to which a 
Government employee is entitled on account of a post to which he has been appointed 
substantively or by reason of his substantive position in a cadre. 
        Note  1.–Substantive pay includes the pay drawn by a probationer in a post to which he 
has been appointed on probation. 
         Note 2.–Substantive pay does not include overseas pay. 
        2.56.  Omitted. 
         2.57.  Omitted.        

15 
   [Chap.  II]       DEFINITIONS [2.58-2.62] 
          2.58. Temporary post means a post carrying a definite rate of pay sanctioned for 
a limited time. Such a post can be held in an officiating capacity. 
         Note.–An extension of a temporary post necessary to cover the period of leave granted 
to its holder, is expedient only when the grant of leave involves no expense to Government, but 
improper in the absence of this condition. 
          2.59.  Tenure  post  means  a  permanent  post  which  an  individual  Government 
employee may not hold for more than a limited period. 
          2.60. (a) Time-scale pay means pay which, subject to any conditions prescribed 
in  these  rules,  rises  by  periodical  increments  from  a  minimum  to  a  maximum.    It 
includes the class of pay previously known as progressive. 
          (b)  Time  scales  are  said  to  be  identical  if  the  minimum,  the  maximum,  the 
period of increment and the rate of increment of time-scales are identical. 
          (c)  A post is said to be on the same time-scale as another post on a time-scale if 
the two time-scales are identical and the posts fall within a cadre, or a class in a cadre, 
such  cadre  or  class  having  been  created  in  order  to  fill  all  posts  involving  duties  of 
approximately   the   same   character   or   degree   of   responsibility   in   a   service   or 
establishment   or   group  of  establishments,  so  that  the  pay  of  the  holder  of  any 
particular post is determined by his position in the cadre or class, and not by the facts 
he holds that post. 
           Note.–Two  time  scales  of  pay  should  be  treated  as  identical  within  the  meaning  of      
Rule 2.60 (b) even though the scales may differ in the matter of provision of efficiency bars. 
         2.61.  Transfer  means  the  movement  of  a  Government  employee  from  one 
headquarters station in which he is employed to another such station, either:– 
 (a)  to take up the duties of a new post; or 
 (b)  in consequence of a change of his headquarters. 
          2.62.  Travelling  allowances  means  an  allowance  granted  to  a  Government 
employee  to  cover  the  expenses  which  he  incurs in  travelling  in  the  interests  of  the 
public  service. It  includes  allowances  granted  for  the  maintenance  of  conveyances, 
horses and tents. 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
 
[Schedule] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
SCHEDULE 
[Referred to in Rule 2.16 (b)] 
        I.  A   Government   employee   is   treated   as   on   duty   under   the   following 
circumstances:– 
(i)   When he is following out a duly authorised course of training or instruction 
in India. 
                Note  1.–The period of Military training of Civil Government employees admitted 
to  the  Army  in  India,  Reserve  of  Officers  or  the  Indian  Territorial  Forces  is  treated  as 
duty. 
        Note  2.–The period spent by Civil Government employees, whether paid from the 
Defence Services Estimates or Civil Estimates on training of pre-cadet provincial school 
with  the  permission  of  the  Head  of  Office  is  treated  as  duty.  This  concession  is  also 
admissible  to  temporary  Government  employees  only  for  so  long  as  they  would  have 
continued in service but for their training. 
                   Note  3.–The  authorities  competent  to  appoint  the  Government  employee  to  the 
post for which the training is essential are empowered to treat the period of training or           
instruction in  India  of  Government  employee  as  duty  for  the  purpose  of  rule  2.16 
subject to the following conditions:– 
            (a)  The training or instruction should be in India; 
            (b)  The  training  or  instruction  should  be  in  public  interest  and  connected  with 
the  post  which the  Government employee is  holding at  the  time  of placing 
him  on  training  or  instruction  and  should  cover  such  a  course  where  a 
Government employee does not secure any academic degree or diploma or 
does not become  eligible  for  securing admission to a  course  leading to the 
award of such degree or diploma; 
            (c)   It is obligatory on the part of the  Government to send the persons for such 
training or instruction; 
            (d)  The  training  should  not  be  in  professional  or technical  subjects  which  are 
considered  in  public  interest  and  which  are  normally  covered  under  the 
provisions relating to study leave, such as a course by which a Government 
employee  secures  academic  degree  or  diploma  or  becomes  eligible  for 
securing  admission  in  a  course  leading  to  the  award  of  such  degree  or 
diploma; and 
             (e)  The period of training should not exceed one year.    
        The  cases  which  do  not  fall  in  the  above  category  shall  be  rejected 
summarily  but  in  cases  in  which  the  course  is  considered  of  great  public 
importance,   there   is   dearth   of   Government   employees   trained   in   it   and 
ordinarily Government  employees are not enthusiastic to undergo such a course  

17 
 [Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS  [Schedule] 
of   their   own volition, Government   may   sponsor   names   of   Government 
employees  for training in  such  a  course  only  with  the  prior  consent  of  the 
Department of Finance. 
        Exception.–Teachers  in  Government  service  who  are  untrained  or  who 
being trained are desirous of undergoing a further course of training shall not be 
regarded  as  on  duty  during  the  course  of  training.  They  may  be  granted  leave 
there for under the ordinary rules with such leave salary as may be admissible. 
      The provisions of the above Exception do not apply to the following cases:– 
(a)   women teachers required to undergo a duly authorised course of   training    
approved by competent authority; 
(b)   teachers  in  Intermediate  Colleges  required  to  undergo  S.S.T.C.  or  B.T.   
training at a Training College; 
(c)   teachers  and  Block  Education  Officers  required  to  attend  a  course  in 
physical training; and 
 (d)    Physical  Training  Supervisors  in  Government  Colleges  required  to  attend 
the Elementary Library Routine Class conducted by the Punjab University. 
 (e)    Women  teachers  from the  Government  Industrial School for girls  or from 
Government   Travelling   Demonstration   Parties   required   to   undergo 
industrial training at the Industrial Teachers Training Class for women. 
   (ii) Period  or  periods  spent  by  an  employee  of  the  Punjab  Government  in 
A.R.P.  Training and  A.R.P.  duty  during  normal  working  hours  with  the 
permission of the head of his office shall be treated as duty for the purpose 
of rule 2.16. 
 (iii) In  the  case  of  a  Government  employee  who  has  been  substantively 
appointed to a post or cadre in a Government service during any course of 
instruction or training which he may be required or permitted to undergo in 
accordance   with   the   terms   of   any   general   or   special   orders   of   the 
competent authority. 
(iv) In  the  case  of  a  student,  stipendiary  or  otherwise,  who  is  entitled  to  be 
appointed  to  the  service  of  Government  on  passing  through  a  course  of 
training  at  a  University  College  or  School  during  the  interval  between 
satisfactory completion of the  course  and  his  assumption of duties, unless 
in any case, it be otherwise provided in the terms of his appointment. 
(v) On  the  first  arrival  in  India  of  Government  employees  appointed  outside 
India,  who  do  not,  before  they  report  themselves  at  the  seat  of  the 
Government of the Punjab, receive orders to take charge of a specified post  

18 
 
 
[Schedule] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
          during the  interval between the  date  of such report and the date  on which        
they  take  charge  of  their duties;  provided  that  the  interval  between  the 
receipts  of  orders  and  their  assumption  of  duties  shall  not  exceed  the 
amount  of  joining  time  which  would  be  admissible  to  a  Government 
employee entitled to joining time under the rules in Chapter IX. 
 (vi) The  period  of  compulsory  waiting  by  a  Government  employee returning 
from leave for orders of Government posting him to a particular post. 
        (vii)    During the period occupied in attending obligatory examinations including  
the time  reasonably necessary  for  the  journeys  to  and  from  the  place  of 
examination. 
(viii) During the  period occupied in attending optional examinations at which a 
Government  employee  is  permitted  to  appear  by  competent  authority  and 
during the time reasonably necessary for the journey to and from the place 
of examination. 
 (ix)     Omitted. 
        (x) The period spent by newly appointed Engineer Officers from the day they    
report  for  duty to the day they complete taking over charge of posts         
involving verification and inspection of stores, etc.   It is not necessary to 
create  new  posts  to  accommodate  the  direct  recruits  since  treating  the 
period as duty is by itself sufficient sanction in this regard. 
   (xi) In all cases of enforced halts occurring en route on tour journeys temporary 
transfer or training, necessitated by break down of communications due to 
blockade of roads  on  account  of floods,  rains,  heavy  snowfall,  landslides, 
or delayed sailings of ships or awaiting for air lift etc. 
                      II. Government employee is not on duty during any time he  may spend beyond 
his sphere of duty except in the following circumstances: – 
           (1)  Under the conditions laid down in clause I above. 
(2)  If a Police Officer, acting with his legal power. 
 (3)  If  an  Excise and  Taxation  Officer,  Assistant  Excise and  Taxation  Officer, 
Excise Inspector, Taxation Inspector or Excise Sub-Inspector acting under 
the  orders  of  (i)  The  Excise  and  Taxation  Commissioner,  or  (ii)  Deputy 
Excise and Taxation Commissioner, or (iii) The Collector. 

19 
  [Chap.  II]  DEFINITIONS [Schedule] 
(4)   A  Tehsildar,  or  Naib-Tehsildar  serving  in  a  mahal,  a  settlement  or  a 
colony post who proceeds under the orders of the Deputy Commissioner, 
Settlement  Officer,  or  Colonisation  Officer, as  the  case  may  be,  beyond 
his sphere of duty but inside the district, or who proceeds under the orders 
of the Commissioner beyond the districts to which he is posted. 
(5)    If authorised by competent authority, by general or special order. 
  (6)   If a ministerial Government employee or a peon, accompanying a    
          recessing officer to his recess station. 
Clarification:–It is not the intention of the rule to keep  an employee returning 
from leave waiting for his posting orders for an inordinately long period and to place 
an avoidable burden on the State Exchequer. Action should be initiated for the posting 
of an employee expected to report for duty well in advance and formal posting orders 
should invariably be issued well before the date of return of the employee to duty. 
.                                                     ANNEXURE ‘A’ 
                         (Referred to in Rule 2.5 and Note 3 thereunder) 
 
          1. In regard to the date of birth, a declaration of age made at the time of or for 
the  purpose  of  entry  into  Government  service  shall,  as  against  the  Government 
employee  in  question,  be  deemed  to  be  conclusive.  The  employees  already  in the 
service  of  the  Government  of  Punjab  on the  date  of  coming  into  force  of the  Punjab 
Civil  Services  (First  Amendment)  Rules,  Volume-I,  Part-I,  1994, may  apply  for  the 
change  of  date  of  birth  within  a  period  of  two  years  from  the  coming  into  force  of 
these rules on the basis  of confirmatory documentary evidence such as Matriculation 
Certificate  or  Municipal  Birth  Certificate,  etc.  No  request  for  the  change  of  date  of 
birth shall be entertained after the expiry of the said period of two years. Government, 
however reserves the right to make a correction in the recorded age of a Government 
employee  at  any  time  against  the  interests  of  the  Government  employees  when  it  is 
satisfied  that  the  age  recorded  in  his  service  book  or  in  the  History  of  service  of  a 
Gazetted Government  employee  is  incorrect  and  has  been  incorrectly  recorded  with 
the   object   that   the   Government   employee   may   derive   some   unfair   advantage 
therefrom. 
        2.  When   a   Government   employee,   within   the   period   allowed,   makes   an 
application for the correction of his date of birth as recorded a special enquiry should 
be  held  to  ascertain  his  correct  age  and  reference  should  be  made  to  all  available 
sources  of  information  such  as  Certified  Copies  of  entries  in  the  municipal  birth 
register,  University  or  School  age  Certificate,  Janam  Patris  or  horoscopes.  It  should, 
however, be  remembered that it is entirely discretionary on the part of the sanctioning  

20 
 
 
[Annexure ‘A’] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. II] 
authority  to refuse  or  grant  such  application  and  no  alteration  should  be  allowed 
unless it has satisfactorily been proved that the date of birth as originally  given by the  
applicant  was  a bonafide mistake  and  that  he  has  derived  no  unfair  advantage 
therefrom.        
         3.  The result of every such enquiry should, in the case of gazetted, non-gazetted 
Government employees be briefly stated in their service cards, service books and if a 
correction is sanctioned, the fact should be reported to the Accountant-General. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

21 
                                                       CHAPTER III  
    GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE 
      CONDITIONS REGARDING HEALTH AND AGE 
(i) Medical Certificate of Fitness on First Entry into Government Service 
        3.1.    Except  as  provided  in rules  3.2  and  3.3,  no  person  may  be  appointed  in 
India  to  a  post, in Government  service  without  medical  certificate  of  health,  in  the 
following form: –   
          “I  hereby  certify  that  I  have  examined  __________, a  candidate,  who  is 
male/female/transgender,   for   employment   in   the   __________Department,   whose 
signature is given above, and could not discover that _____________has any disease 
(communicable  or  otherwise),  constitutional  weakness  or  bodily  infirmity,  except 
____________,which    I  do  not  consider any  disqualification for  employment  in  the 
office  of  ___________. His/her    age,  according  to  his/her  own  statement  is_____ 
years  and  by  appearance  about  ______years______ has  been  vaccinated  within  the 
last 12 months or has been re-vaccinated within the last 12 months, or has already had 
small-pox and shows obvious scars thereof.” 
                                                        Photo of the candidate duly attested under the seal 
                                                        and signature of Competent Medical Authority 
                                                        issuing the certificate. 
                                                        Marks of identification ______________. 
                                                          Impressions of the left hand  
                                                          thumb and fingers. 
 Signature of Applicant. 
                                                       Signature of Competent Medical Authority. 
         In  the  case  of  candidates  for  Group „C‟ and „D‟ Services, a  declaration  in  the 
Form, appended as an Annexure at the end of this Chapter, shall be obtained from the 
candidates   at   the   time   of   medical   examination   required   by   this   rule,   or   on                   
re-employment  to  Government  service.  This  declaration  form  should  be  filled  in  by 
the candidate concerned in the presence of the medical officer. 
         Explanation:–The  person  belonging  to  Transgender  sex  shall  be  treated  as  a 
male. 
         Exception  1:–The  Administrative  Department may authorise the  drawal of pay 
and  allowances  for a  period  not  exceeding two  months  in respect  of  fresh  recruits to 
Government  service  without  a  medical  certificate  of  health,  subject  to  the  condition 
that  if  the  person  concerned  is  subsequently  found  medically  unfit  his services     
should  be  terminated  after  the  expiry  of  the  period  of one month from the date of  

22 
[3.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.  III] 
communication  to  him  of  the  findings  of  the  Medical  Officer/Board  if  no  appeal  for 
second  medical examination  is  made  by  him  during  this  period  or  after  the  case  for 
second  medical  examination  is  finally  decided  if  such  an  appeal, is  made  and 
accepted. This condition should be clearly stated in the initial letter of appointment. 
The  Administrative  Department  shall,  however,  exercise  this  power  sparingly 
and  in  exceptional  circumstances  only,  e.g.,  when  it  is  considered  necessary  in the 
public interest that a selected person should be appointed immediately in anticipation 
of his medical examination. 
         Exception  2:–The  Administrative  Department may authorise the  drawal of pay 
and  allowances  without  production  of  fitness  certificate  in  respect  of  Government 
employees, other than those covered by clauses (a) and (b) of Note 2 (iv) below rule 
3.4 who are promoted to hold Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ posts and who are required to 
undergo  medical  examination  by  the  appropriate  medical  authority,  for  a  period  not 
exceeding  two  months  subject  to  the  condition  that  if  the  person  concerned  is 
subsequently  found  medically  unfit,  he  should  be  reverted  to  the  lower  post  from 
which  he  had  been  promoted,  after  the  expiry  of  one  month  from  the  date  of 
communication to him of findings of the examining medical authority if no appeal for 
a second medical examination is made by him during this period or after the case for 
second medical examination is finally decided if such an appeal is made and accepted. 
This  condition  should  clearly  be  stated  in  the  relevant  orders  of  promotion  to  the 
Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ post. 
           Note 1.–In the case of literate persons who can sign in English, Punjabi or Hindi, it will 
be sufficient if the examining Medical Officer or Board obtains on the Medical Certificate only 
the  signature  of  the  candidate  in  his  or  its  presence  which  should  he  verified  by  the  Head  of 
Office by comparison with that in the Service Book. 
          Note 2.–A certificate to the effect that the medical certificate in the prescribed form has 
been obtained in respect of the Government employee should be furnished to the Audit Office 
as under :– 
         (i)  In respect of Group „A‟ and „B‟ employees, certificate furnished by the competent 
authority  to  whom  the  medical  certificate  has  been  submitted,  should  be  attached  to  the  first 
pay bill. 
         (ii)  In  respect  of Group „C‟ employees the  drawing  and  disbursing  officers  should 
furnish certificate alongwith the first pay bill of the Government employee concerned. 
        (iii) Where  the  competent  authority  under  „exception‟  below  rule  3.1  authorises  the 
drawal of the pay and allowances of a newly appointed Government employee for a period not 
exceeding two months without a medical certificate of health, a certificate to this effect should 
be furnished in the first pay bill. 
         

23 
[ Chap.  III]  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [3.1-3.3] 
          (iv) Where an officer is declared temporary unfit by the competent medical authority and 
retained in service the period for which the officer has been declared temporarily unfit should 
be intimated to audit. 
          Note 3. Omitted.  
   Note 4.– The fee to be charged for medical examination of candidates selected for fresh 
appointment  to the posts in  connection  with  the  affairs  of the State,  shall  be  notified  by  the 
Government from time to time. The entire amount of fee shall be credited into the Government 
Treasury. 
 
   Note   5.–(1) The  fee  to  be  charged  for  appeals  against  Medical  Examination  of 
Government  employees  who  have  been  declared  unfit  by  the  Principal  Medical  Officer  or 
Assistant to Civil Surgeon/Standing Medical Board shall be notified by the Government from 
time to time.  
          (2)  Omitted. 
        (3) The fee for the second appeal in case of rejection on account of visual acuity 
which is permissible in doubtful cases will be same as the fee in case of first appeal. 
        (4) There   should   be   no   additional   charges   for   the   inclusion   of second 
Ophthalmologist in the special Medical Board in case of appeals against rejection on 
account  of  visual  acuity.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Government  to  constitute  the 
special Medical  Board  with  two Ophthalmologists  and  it  is  an  internal  arrangement 
as to where the second Ophthalmologist is called from. 
        (5) The successful appellant may be refunded the fee of appeal and also be paid 
travelling  allowance  by  his  department  for  his attendance  before  the  Board  on  the 
analogy  of  the  practice  in  case  of  appeal  against  invalidment.  The  Travelling 
Allowance should be granted equal to actual railway fare (of class of accommodation 
to  which  they  are  entitled)  without  any  allowance  for  incidental  expenses  and  daily 
allowance for the journey to be undertaken to appear before the Medical Board which 
is constituted to have another opinion about fitness. 
          3.2. A   competent   authority   may,   in   individual   cases,   dispense   with   the 
production  of  a  medical  certificate  and  may,  by  general  order,  exempt  any  specified 
class of Government employees from the operation of rule 3.1. 
          Note.–Once a  person  is asked  to produce a  Medical  Certificate  of fitness for entry into 
Government  service  and  has  actually  been  examined  and  declared  unfit,  it  is  not  open  to  the 
competent authority to use its discretion to ignore the certificate. 
         3.3.  Except  where  the  competent  authority  by  general  or  special  order  directs 
otherwise,  the  following  classes of  Government  employees  are  exempted  from 
producing a Medical Certificate of  health:– 
(1)   A Government employee appointed by the High Commissioner for India. 

24 
[3.3] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. III] 
(2)   A  qualified  student of  the  Thomason  College,  Roorkee,  permanently 
appointed to the Public Works Department within 18 months from the date 
of  the  health  certificate  granted  to  him  on  the  completion  of  the  College 
Course. 
(3)   A  Government  employee  appointed  in  a  temporary  vacancy  for  a  period 
not exceeding six months. 
(4)   A  temporary  Government  employee  who  has  already  been  medically 
examined  in  one  office  if  transferred  to  another  office  without  a  break  in 
his  service.  The  person  concerned  should,  however,  obtain  a certificate 
from  the  Head  of  office from  which  he  is  transferred  to the  effect  that  he 
had already produced the requisite medical certificate of Health. 
(5)   A retired Government employee re-employed immediately after retirement. 
(6)   An  ex-serviceman  disabled  in  war  operation.–In  his  case,  however,  the 
certificate of fitness granted by the Demobilisation Defence Services            
Medical  Board  for  Civil  Service  may  be  considered  valid  for  service   
under the Punjab Government: 
              Provided  that  the  above  certificate  is  not  found  to  be  inconsistent 
with the minimum standard otherwise prescribed for the post of service to 
which the appointment is to be made: 
              Provided  further that  in  case  where  period  of  not  less  than  one  year 
has elapsed since the release of the disabled ex-serviceman from the Army, 
or it is otherwise considered necessary, the appointing authority shall have 
the    power    to    get    such    ex-serviceman    examined    by    the    Civil 
Surgeon/Principal Medical Officer concerned. 
         Note 1.–The production of a Medical certificate is necessary when:– 
(i) A  Government  employee  is  promoted  from  a  non-qualifying  service  paid  
from a local fund to a post in superior Government service. 
(ii)  A person is re-employed after resignation or forfeiture of past service. 
         Exception: A  person  re-employed  after  resignation  shall  be  exempted  from 
producing a medical certificate of fitness if the resignation was for taking up another 
appointment under Government or quasi-Government body for which he applied with 
the approval of and through the appropriate authority; provided that he was medically 
examined  by  the  Competent  Medical  Authority  and  declared  fit  according  to  the 
medical standards not lower than those in his new post. 
         
 

25 
[Chap.  III]  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [3.3-3.4] 
         Note  2.–In  the  case  of  Government  employees  referred  to  in  clause  (3)  of  the  rule;  the 
appointing  authorities  should,  in  any  case,  satisfy  themselves  that  the  candidate  is  protected 
against smallpox. 
        3.4.  (1)  (a)  Except  in  the  case  of  Members  of  the  Punjab  Home  Guards,  the 
Medical  Certificate  of  health  shall  be  signed  by  a  Medical  Board  in  the  case  of  a 
Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ Government employee, and by a Principal Medical Officer or 
an Assistant to Civil Surgeon or a Medical Officer of equivalent status in the case of a 
Group „C‟ Government employee. 
         (b)  In  the  case  of  the  members  of  the  Punjab  Home  Guards  who  are  primarily 
governed by the Punjab Home Guards Act, 1947 and the Punjab Home Guards‟ Rules 
1963, the medical certificate of health shall be signed by a Principal Medical Officer 
or Assistant to Civil Surgeon in the case of Group „A‟ and Group „B‟ employees and 
by  a  Senior  Medical  Officer  or  a  Medical  Officer  of  equivalent  status  in  the  case  of 
Group „C‟ and Group „D‟ employees, and the medical examination shall  be  held  in 
accordance  with  the  standard  laid  down  by  the  Commandant-General,  Punjab Home 
Guards. 
(2) (a) In the case of a female candidate appointed to a Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ 
post, the medical certificate shall be signed by a Medical Board consisting of a woman 
doctor possessing medical qualification included in one of the Schedules to the Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) as one of its members, and  
(b)  In  the  case  of  a  female  candidate  appointed  to  a Group „C‟ or Group „D‟ 
post, the medical certificate shall be signed by a registered female medical practitioner 
possessing  a  medical  qualification  included  in  one  of  the  Schedules  to  the  Indian 
Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956). 
(3) In the case of Group „D‟ Government employees, the medical certificate 
shall   be   signed   by   the   Authorised   Medical Attendant   possessing   a   medical 
qualification included  in  one  of  the  Schedules  to  the  Indian  Medical  Council  Act, 
1956  (102  of  1956)  and  where  there  is  no  such  Authorised  Medical  Attendant  by  a 
Government  Medical  Officer  of  the  nearest  dispensary  or  hospital  possessing  such 
qualification. 
         (4)   A candidate   who   is   likely   to   be   employed   in   a   temporary   capacity 
continuously for a period exceeding three months shall produce either before or within 
a  week  from  the  date  of  employment,  the  certificate  from  the  competent  medical 
authority as prescribed in this rule. When, however, a Government employee initially 
employed in an office in a temporary capacity for a period not exceeding three months 
is subsequently retained in that office or is transferred without a break to another office 
and  the  total  period of continuous service  under Government is expected to last for a  
 

26 
[3.4] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. III] 
period exceeding three months he shall produce such a certificate within a week from 
the date of orders sanctioning his retention in that office or joining the new office.          
         Note 1.–(i)  A person  who  is  appointed  to  Government  service  afresh  after  a break 
in service not exceeding one year should be treated as in continuous service for the purpose of 
these  orders,  the  period  of  break  not  being  counted.  If,  however,  the  period  of  break  exceeds 
one year, he should be regarded as a fresh entrant to Government service.           
          (ii)  A person  who is in continuous  service  but in different posts  should be  deemed for 
the purpose of these orders to have been in continuous service in the same post. 
          Note  2.–(i)  Except  as  provided  in  para (4),  a  Government  employee,  holding  under 
Punjab Government:– 
(a) a Group „C‟ or Group „D‟ post when appointed to another Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ 
post, or  
(b)   a Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ post when appointed to another Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ 
post,  either  by  transfer  or  on  promotion  in  the  same  line  or  in  a  different  line 
through  open  competitive  examination,  need  not  be  required  to  undergo  medical 
examination  by  the  Medical  Board,  if  he  has  already  been  declared  fit  on  medical 
examination by the Civil Surgeon at the time of his entry into Government Service. 
(ii) A permanent Government employee holding a Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ post in 
Centre or under any other State Government when appointed to a Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ post 
under  the  State  Government  need  not  be subjected  to  a  fresh  medical  examination  by  a 
Medical Board ; 
(iii) A permanent Government employee holding a Group „C‟ or Group „D‟ post in the 
Centre or under any other State Government when appointed to a Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ post 
under  the  Punjab  Government  will  be  required  to  undergo  a  fresh  medical  examination  by  a 
Medical Board, but when appointed to a Group „C‟ or Group „D‟ post, no Medical examination 
will be necessary ; and 
(iv)  In  cases  where  the  rules  for  recruitment  to  new  appointment prescribe  a  fresh 
medical  examination  in  respect  of  all  candidates,  all  directly  recruited/selected  candidates 
irrespective of the fact whether they are already in permanent or quasi-permanent Government 
service in the same or in other departments or are fresh appointees, should undergo a medical 
examination by the prescribed standard and by the prescribed medical authority; provided that 
a fresh medical examination will not be necessary in the case of – 
(a)   a person   who   is   already   in   permanent   or   quasi-permanent   employ   of   the 
Government and  has already  under gone  a  medical  examination by a  standard and 
by  a  medical  authority  which  are  recognised  by  the  appointing  authority  as 
equivalent   to   those   prescribed   for   the   new   appointment   for   which   he   is 
recruited/selected ; and 
 
 

27 
 
[Chap.  III]  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [3.4-3.6] 
(b)   a person who is already in permanent or quasi-permanent employ in the same line, 
and being eligible for promotion to the new appointment against a promotion quota 
of vacancies, is actually so promoted. 
         Note 3.  Omitted. 
                                      Note 4.–The Group „A‟ and Group „B‟ employees posted at Delhi are permitted to produce 
certificates of health and age signed by the Medical Board, Delhi. 
                                      Note  5.–A  candidate  recruited  to  the  P.C.S.  (Executive Branch)  from  Register  A-1 
(Tehsildars and  Naib-Tehsildars)  and  Register  A-II  (Ministerial  Government  employees) 
should  not  be  required  to  undergo  medical  examination  if  he  was  medically  examined  and 
declared fit on appointment to Government Service. 
        3.5.  When  a  Government  employee  in  whom  a  defect  has  been  noticed  by  the 
examining  surgeon,  but  which  defect  is  not  considered  to  be  a  disqualification  for 
employment  in  the  particular  office  or  department  in  which  he  is  serving,  is 
subsequently  transferred  to  another  office  or  department  the  duties  of  which  are  of  a 
different character, the transfer shall not be regarded as permanent until the Principal 
Medical Officer or Assistant to Civil Surgeon or other medical authority referred to in 
rule,  3.4  has,  at  the  written  request  of  the  Head  of  the  new  office  or  department, 
certified  either  that  the  defect  previously  noticed  has  disappeared  or  that  it  does  not 
constitute a disqualification for the new duties entrusted to the Government employee. 
        3.5-A. The  appointing  authority  shall  have  power  to  require  a  Government 
employee to appear before a Medical Board to test his physical fitness for the efficient 
discharge of the duties of his post, whenever, it has reason to believe that Government 
employee  is  not  physically  fit  to  carry  out  his  duties satisfactorily. The  Government 
employee  concerned  shall,  however,  have  a  right  of  appeal  to  an  appellate  Medical 
Board, against the decision of the first Medical Board. 
                                       (ii)  Age of entry into Government Service. 
         3.6. The age  limit  for  persons  to  be  appointed  to  the  posts  and  services  in 
connection with the affairs of the State of Punjab shall be such as may be specified by 
the Government from time to time. 
          Note.–See  rules 5  and  5-A  of  the  Punjab  Civil  Services  (General  and  Common 
Conditions of Service) Rules, 1994 and rule 5 of the Punjab State (Group „D‟) Service Rules, 
1963.                                                                                                                                         
        3.7. Omitted. 
         3.8. Omitted.     
                        

28 
[3.9-3.12 ]                        THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. III] 
                                     (iii) Vaccination and re-vaccination. 
         3.9. Every Government employee shall get himself vaccinated and re-vaccinated 
at any time when so directed by the Government by general or special order. 
WHOLE TIME OF A GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE AT THE DISPOSAL OF 
GOVERNMENT 
        3.10. Unless in any case it be otherwise distinctly provided, the whole time of a 
Government  employee  is  at  the  disposal  of  the  Government  which  pays  him  and  he 
may  be  employed  in  any  manner  required  by  proper  authority,  without  claim  or 
additional  remuneration,  whether  the  services  required  of  him  are  such  as  would 
ordinarily  be  remunerated  from  Union  or  State  revenues,  or  from  the  revenues  of  a 
local fund. 
SUBSTANTIVE APPOINTMENT AND LIEN 
         3.11. Omitted.         
         3.12.  (1)  A  Government  employee  confirmed  on  a  post  acquires  a  lien  on  that 
post. If such a Government employee is appointed by direct recruitment or by transfer 
in another department or in a different cadre in the same department, as the case may 
be, he shall give an option to acquire the lien on the post, presently held by him within 
a period of six months after the completion of his probation period, and on exercise of 
such  an  option,  he  shall  cease  to  hold  the  lien  on  the post  in  the  parent  cadre  or 
department,  as  the  case  may  be,  from  the  date  he  is  confirmed  against  the  post 
presently held by him. If such an option is not exercised by him within the aforesaid 
stipulated  period,  he  shall be  reverted  back  to  the  parent  cadre  or  department,  as  the 
case may be. 
          (2)    In  the  case  of  a  temporary  Government  employee,  who  is  appointed  by 
direct  recruitment  or  by  transfer  in  another  department  or  in  a  different  cadre  in  the 
same  department,  he  shall not  be  allowed  to retain any  lien  on the post  held  prior to 
this his new appointment after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of his 
joining against the new post. 
        Note.–If  a Government employee, who is confirmed against a post in  a department, has 
been  appointed  by  direct  recruitment  or  by  transfer  in  another  department  or  in  a  different 
cadre  in  the  same  department  and  has  also  completed  his  probation  period,  but  has  not  been 
confirmed  on  the  new  post  upto  the  date  of  publication  of  the  Punjab  Civil  Services            
Rules (First Amendment) Rules, Volume-I, Part-I, 1997, in the Official Gazette, he  shall give 
an option to acquire lien on the post presently held by him within a period of six months from  
the  date  of  publication  of  the  said  rules.  If  such  an  option  is  not  exercised  by  him  within  the 
aforesaid  stipulated  period,  he  shall  cease  to  hold  the  lien  on  the  post  in  the  parent  cadre  or 
post  or  department,  as  the case  may  be,  from  the  date  he  is  confirmed  against  the  new  post 
presently held by him. 

29 
 [Chap.  III]   GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [3.15-3.19] 
         3.13. Omitted. 
          3.14. Omitted. 
          3.15. A Government employee‟s lien on a post, shall, in no circumstances, be 
terminated, even with his consent, if the result will be to leave him without a lien on 
any post. 
          3.16. Omitted. 
          3.17.  (a)  Government  may  transfer  a  Government  employee  from  one  post  to 
another; Provided that except– 
 (1)    on account of inefficiency or misbehaviour; or 
 (2)    on his written request;  
a  Government employee shall not be transferred substantively to or, except in a case 
covered by rule 4.22, appointed to officiate in a post carrying less pay than the pay of 
the permanent post on which he holds a lien. 
           (b)  Omitted. 
 Note 1.–In cases covered by clause (a) (2) above the Government employee will have 
his initial pay fixed under rule 4.4 and, if necessary, under rule 4.10. 
 Note  2.–Permanent  transfer  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  scale  in  anticipation  of  the 
abolition of a post is not transfer within the meaning of this rule. 
 Note 3.–In cases in which it is desired to give to a Government employee an extension 
of  service  on  the  condition  that  he  voluntarily  agrees  to  accept  a  post  in  a  lower  grade,  so  as 
not to interfere with the legitimate expectations of his juniors to promotion; the only method is 
to  create  a  temporary  post.  Such  a  step can  only  be  permitted  under  most  exceptional 
circumstances. It must be regarded as the normal course of events that an extension of service 
involves delay of promotion to juniors and no proposal for the creation of a temporary post to 
satisfy legitimate expectations will be considered unless it has been submitted to the competent 
authority before the extension of service is granted. 
 SUBSCRIPTION TO PROVIDENT FUNDS 
          3.18.  A  Government  employee  may  be  required  to  subscribe  to  a  provident 
fund, a family pension fund or other similar fund in accordance with such rules as the 
competent authority may by order prescribe. 
  DATE OF RECKONING PAY AND ALLOWANCES 
          3.19.(1) Subject   to   any   exceptions   specifically   made   in   these   rules,   a 
Government employee commences or ceases to be entitled to the pay and allowances 
of  a  post with effect from the  date he assumes or relinquishes charge of the duties of  
 

30 
[3.19-3.22] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. III] 
that post, if he assumes or relinquishes charge of those duties in the forenoon of that 
date; otherwise from the following day. 
           Note.–This rule does not apply  to cases in  which it is the  recognised practice  to pay a 
Government employee at higher rate for more important duties performed during a part only of 
a day. 
          (2) The  date  from  which  a  person  recruited  overseas  shall  commence  to draw 
pay  on  first  appointment  shall  be  determined  by  the  general  or  special  orders  of  the 
authority by whom he is appointed. 
          3.20. The pay of personnel recruited by Government overseas who receive free 
passages, other than 1st class  passages, on their first appointment, should commence 
from the date of embarkation for India: Provided that pay for the period from the date 
of embarkation for India  up to the date  of joining their posts  will be admissible only 
on the condition that they join their appointments without unnecessary delay. The pay 
of  personnel  who  receive  first  class  passages  should  commence from  the  date  of 
disembarkation in India: unless it is provided otherwise in his agreement or contract, 
or Government specially allow pay from any earlier date in any individual case. When 
they are prevented from proceeding at once from the Port of disembarkation in India 
to  take  up  their  appointments,  they  should  be  granted  leave  not  due  under rule       
8.119 (d), as the circumstances of the case may require. 
        Note.–The phrase “without unnecessary delay” occurring at the end of the first sentence 
of  this  rule  should  be  interpreted  with  reference  to  the  joining  time  rules.  This  stipulation 
should be regarded as fulfilled if the  officer reports for duty  within the  period allowed by the 
joining  time  rules  with  only  one  day  (instead  of  six  days)  for  preparation  at  the  port  of 
disembarkation and any excess over that number of days should be treated as “leave not due”. 
The minimum of the officer‟s time scale of pay (including overseas pay) or if there be no time 
scale but fixed pay, the fixed pay may be treated as his pay for the purpose of calculating half 
pay for the period of “leave not due”. 
          The phrase „without unnecessary delay‟ should be taken as referring only to the delay on 
the  part of the  officer in reporting  himself for duty (either at the  headquarters of Government 
or at the actual place of duty, as the case may be) and not delay in actually taking up his duties 
thereafter. 
          3.21. Omitted. 
  CHARGE OF OFFICE 
          3.22.  Except as provided in rules 3.23, 3.24 and 8.25 to 8.33, the charge of an 
office  must  be  made  over  at  its  headquarters;  both  the  relieving  and  relieved 
Government employees being present. 
         Note 1.–Every   relieving   Government   employee   is   responsible   for   informing   the 
Government employee  to  be relieved, at the earliest possible moment of the date when he will  

31 
   [Chap.  III]  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [3.22-3.24] 
be in a position to receive charge and it is the duty of the Government employee to be relieved 
to be in readiness to deliver charge on that date. 
          Note  2.–When  more  than  one  day  is  occupied  in  making  over  charge,  the  last  date 
should be entered in the Charge Report and an explanation should be submitted.         
         3.23.  A  competent  authority  may  permit  the  provisions  of  rule 3.22 to  be 
relaxed  either  as  to  the  place  of  making  over  charge  or  the  condition  that  both 
Government employees shall be present, or both: Provided – 
           (a)   both   Government   employees   must   be  present   unless  the   transfer   or 
assumption  of  charge  does  not  involve  the  handing  or  taking  over  of 
securities or of moneys other than a permanent advance; 
          (b)   if the  Government  employee  relieved  departs  before  the  arrival  of  his 
relief,  his  early  departure  shall  not  entail  a  correspondingly  early  transfer 
from another station of a Government employee to perform his duties ; and 
          (c)   if  the  Government  employee  relieving  arrives  or  returns  from  leave  after 
the departure of the Government employee relieved, the delay in his arrival 
or return shall not involve a corresponding delay in the transfer to another 
station of the Government employee who was performing his duties during 
his  absence  or  in  the  discharge  from  Government  service  of  a  person 
temporarily appointed to it. 
          Explanation:–In  deciding  whether  the  absence  of  a  Government  employee 
involves the transfer of a Government employee from another station for the purpose 
of the provisos (b) and (c) of this rule, account should be taken only of the substitute 
who  takes  the  place  of  the  absent  Government  employee,  not  of  all  Government 
employees,  in  the  chain  of  arrangements  arising  from  one  Government employee‟s 
absence on leave. 
           Note 1.–For  rules  regarding  the  prefixing  and  affixing  of  holidays  and  vacation to  
joining time and leave see rules 8.26 to 8.33. 
           Note 2.–In cases  involving  transfer  and  charge  of  an  office  elsewhere  than  its 
headquarters, the exact nature of the reasons should be expressed on the face of the orders for 
the information of the Audit Officer. 
          3.24.   On   condition   that   the   departing   Government   employee   remains 
responsible  for  the  moneys  in  his  charge,  a  competent  authority  may  declare  that 
proviso (a) under rule 3.23 is not applicable to any particular case. 
    Note.–The  handing  over  of  a  permanent  advance  is  not  a  transfer  of  money,  but  the 
Government employee going on leave continues to be responsible for the money till the formal 
assumption of charge by his successor. 

32 
                     CONTINUOUS ABSENCE FROM DUTY 
         3.25. (1)   Unless the   competent   authority   in   view   of   the   exceptional 
circumstances  of  the  case,  otherwise  determines,  no  Government  employee  shall  be 
granted leave of any kind for a continuous period exceeding five years. 
         (2)  Where  a  Government  employee  does  not  resume  duty  after  remaining  on 
leave for a continuous period of five years, or where a Government employee after the 
expiry of his leave remains absent from  duty, otherwise than on foreign service or on 
account  of  suspension,  for  any  period  which,  together  with  the  period  of  the  leave 
granted to him, exceeds  five  years, he  shall, unless, the  competent authority, in view 
of  the  exceptional  circumstances  of  the  case,  otherwise  determine,  be  removed  from 
service   after   following   the   procedure   laid   down   in   the   Punjab   Civil   Services 
(Punishment and Appeal), Rules, 1970. 
                          Note.–This  rule  does  not  relate  to  cases  where  a  Government  employee  is  restrained 
from  resuming  duty  by  an  order  placing  him  under  suspension.  Sanction  of  the  competent 
authority  in  terms  of  this  rule  in  such  a  case  is  not,  therefore,  necessary.  It  is  essential, 
however,  in  the  interests  of  Government  as  well  as  of  the  concerned  officer  that  disciplinary 
proceeding against an officer under suspension should be expedited and final orders passed as 
soon as possible.                          
                                                                                     RETIREMENT 
  3.26. (a) Except as otherwise provided in this rule, the date of retirement of a 
Government employee shall be as follows, namely:‒ 
   (i)   fifty-eight years in the case of Group „A‟, „B‟ and „C‟ employees; and 
   (ii)  sixty years in the case of Group „D‟ employees; 
   Provided that if the State Government is of the opinion that it is necessary and 
expedient so to do in public interest, the Service of a Government employee or a class 
of Government employees, may be extended for a period of two years on yearly basis, 
subject, however, to giving an option within a period of three months before the date 
of retirement by the Government employee, who seeks extension: 
   Provided  further  that  a  Government  employee,  who  is  already  on  extension, 
shall also give fresh option within a period of one month from the date of publication 
of these rules: 
   Provided  further  that  no Government  employee, shall  be  retained  in  Service, 
after  the  completion  of his  extended  period  of  Service. However  under  exceptional 
circumstances, if the State Government considers it necessary and expedient so to do 
in  public  interest,  it  may  extend  the  Service  of  a  Government  employee  beyond  the 
aforesaid limit, for the reasons to be recorded, in writing. 
 [3.25-3.26] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. III] 

33 
   [Chap.  III]  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [3.26] 
 (b)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  contrary  in  these  rules  or  any  other 
rules  for  the  time  being  in force,  during  the  extended  period  of  Service  under clause 
(a), the Government employee shall be entitled to pay equal to the pay last drawn by 
him,  on attaining  the  age  of  fifty-eight  years  or  sixty  years  including  an  employee, 
who is already on extension, as the case may be: 
 Provided that the  Government employee, whose Service is extended, shall not 
be entitled to, ‒ 
  (i)  promotion; 
 (ii)  the benefit of Assured Career Progression; 
(iii)  an annual increment; and 
(iv)  any revision of pay made by the State Government: 
 Provided   further   that   the   pay   of   the   Government   employee   already   on 
extension,   who   has   been   given   promotion   or   the   benefit   of   Assured Career 
Progression  during  the  extended  period  till  the  issue  of  this  notification,  shall  be 
protected and he shall be given the retiral benefits on the basis of his protected pay. 
          (c)  A  member  of  the  Punjab  Civil  Services  (Judicial  Branch)  or  the  Superior 
Judicial Service shall be  required  to retire  on attaining the  age  of sixty years  if High 
Court is  satisfied  of  his continued utility  to the judicial system, subject to evaluation 
of his potential by making an objective assessment of his work, conduct and integrity 
and also keeping in view the reputation acquired by him as a Judicial Officer and has 
passed  an  order  in  this  regard, otherwise the Judicial Officer  will  retire  at the  age  of 
fifty eight years.  
          Explanation:–The  decision  to  enhance  the  age  of  superannuation  for  the 
officers  of  the  Punjab  Civil  Services  (Judicial  Branch)  and  of  Superior  Judicial 
Service has been taken in pursuance of decision of the Supreme Court dated the 24th 
August, 1993 in Review Petition No. 249 of 1992 in Writ Petition No. 1022 of 1989 
and shall be applicable in consonance with guidelines laid therein.  
          (d)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this  rule  a  Government  employee 
whose date of birth falls on any day of month other than the first of that month, shall 
on attaining the age of superannuation determined in accordance with the provision of 
clause  (a),  (b)  or  (c)  as  the  case  may  be,  retire  on  the  last  day  of  that  month,  which 
will be a working day. 
         Explanation.–A  Government  employee  whose  date  of  birth  is  the  first  of  the 
month shall retire on the afternoon of the last day of the preceding month. 
                              Note 1.– Omitted.                                                    
                              

34 
                                     Note 2.–Military Officers serving in Civil employ shall cease to be in such employ on  
reaching the age of 58 years. 
         Note  3.–Clauses  (a) and (b)  of  this  rule  apply  to  all  Government  employees  to  whom 
these  rules  as  a  whole  apply,  whether  they  be  holding  temporary  or  permanent  posts 
substantively or in an officiating capacity. When a Government employee holding a permanent 
post  substantively  is  officiating  in  another  post,  this  rule  should  be  applied  according  to  the 
character  of  the  post  in  which  he  is  officiating  and  not  according  to  the  character  of  the 
permanent post held substantively by him. 
           Note 4.–Omitted. 
           Note 5.–Regarding the day of attaining a specified age, see rule 2.5. 
           Note 6.–This rule is applicable to re-employed personnel and the rules in Chapter VII of 
Volume  II  of  these  rules  are  subject  to  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this  rule.   Rule  7.17  of 
Volume  II  of  these  rules,  however,  from  the  nature  of  its  concession  and  conditions  puts  the    
re-employment of a person in receipt of a superannuation or retiring pension in a special class 
outside this rule and subject to the conditions stated in that rule itself which must be observed 
with every renewal of sanction. 
          3.27. Notwithstanding anything contained in rule 3.26, the date of retirement of 
a  Government  employee (other  than  a  Group „D‟ employee), who  is  suffering  from 
any  of  the  disabilities viz., blindness  or  low  vision,  hearing  impairment,  locomotor 
disability or cerebral palsy, shall be  the  date  on which he  attains  the  age  of 60 years 
instead of 58 years:  
           Provided that whenever an appointing authority has reason to believe that such 
a Government employee is mentally or physically unsuitable to discharge the duties of 
the  post  held  by  him,  it  shall  require  him  to  appear  before  a  Civil  Surgeon  for  a 
medical  check-up  and  his  continuance  in  the  Government  service  beyond  the  age  of 
58 years, shall be subject to being declared fit on such medical check-up.           
          Explanation 1.– (i) The term “disabilities” used in this rule shall have the same 
meaning  as  defined  in  Persons  With  Disabilities  (Equal  Opportunities,  Protection  of 
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (Central Act 1 of 1996); and 
          (ii) The expression “a Government employee, who is suffering from any of the 
disabilities” means a Government employee who is suffering from not less than forty 
per  cent  of  any of  the  disabilities  mentioned  in  this  rule  as  certified  by  the medical 
authority specified by the Government.  
          Explanation  2.–(i)  A  Government  employee  whose  date  of  birth  falls  on  any 
day of month other than the first of that month, shall on attaining the age of 60 years, 
retire on the last day of that month, which will be a working day; and                                        
         (ii)  A Government employee whose date of birth is the first of the month shall 
retire on the afternoon of the last day of the preceding month. 
[3.26-3.27] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. III] 

35 
   [Chap.  III]  GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE [Annexure] 
ANNEXURE 
   (Referred to in rule 3.1) 
CANDIDATE‟S STATEMENT AND DECLARATION 
The   candidate   must   make   the   statement   required   below   prior   to   his   Medical 
Examination and must sign the declaration appended thereto. His attention is specially 
directed to the warning contained in the Note below: – 
1.  State your name  
(in full in block letters) 
 
2. State your age and place of birth 
 
2A. State your sex: 
(Male/Female/Transgender) 
 
3. (a)   Have  you  ever  had  small-pox, 
intermittent  or  any  other  fever, 
enlargement  or  suppuration  of 
glands,     spitting     of     blood, 
asthma,    heart    disease,    lung 
disease, fainting attacks, 
rheumatism appendicitis? 
OR 
(b)   any other  disease  or  accident 
requiring   confinement   to   bed 
and medical or surgical 
treatment ? 
 
 
4. When you were last vaccinated? 
 
5. Have   you   or   any   of   your   near 
relations been afflicted with 
consumption, scrofula, gout, 
asthma, fits, epilepsy, or insanity? 
 
6. Have you suffered from any form of 
nervousness due to overwork or any 
other cause? 
 
7. Have    you    been    examined    and 
declared    unfit    for    Government 
service by a Medical 
Officer/Medical  Board,  within  the 
last three years? 
 

36 
8 Furnish the following particulars concerning  your family : 
Father‟s  age  if 
living  and  state 
of health 
Father‟s  age  at 
death  and  cause 
of death 
Number of brothers 
living,    their    ages 
and state of health 
Number     of     brothers 
dead, their ages at death 
and cause of death 
  
 
 
 
 
Mother‟s age if 
living and state 
of health 
Mother‟s age at 
death and cause 
of death 
Number of sisters 
living, their ages 
and state of health 
Number of sisters dead, 
their ages at death and 
cause of death 
        
9. Please  state  whether  you  have  deposited 
the Medical   Examination   Fee   in   the 
Government Treasury  under head “0210–
Medical and Public  Health–80–General–
800–Other Receipts–02–Examination and 
License  Fees” according  to  the  status  of 
the  post  against  which  you  have  been 
appointed. If so,  state  the  amount and  the 
Treasury receipt No. and date. 
  
  
  
  
 
 I declare all the above answers to be, to the best of my belief, true and correct. 
 I also solemnly affirm that I have not received a disability certificate pension on 
account of any disease or other condition. 
           Candidate‟s Signature_____________ 
                                                   Signed in my presence 
                                                    __________________           
                                     
                                                             Signature of Medical Officer  
         Note.–The  candidate  will  be  held  responsible  for  the  accuracy  of  the above  statement. 
By wilfully suppressing any information he will incur the risk of losing the appointment and, if 
appointed, of forfeiting all claims to Superannuation allowance or gratuity.  
 [Annexure]  THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. III] 
   

37 
                                                         CHAPTER IV  
 PAY 
 GENERAL 
                      4.1. (1)  Subject  to  the  rules  contained  in  this  Chapter,  a  competent  authority 
may fix the pay of a Government employee, but his pay shall not be so increased as to 
exceed the pay sanctioned for his post without the sanction of the authority competent 
to create a post in the same cadre on a rate of pay equal to his pay when increased: 
                   Provided  that  the  Government  employee  except  a  member  of  service  of  the 
Punjab Civil Service (Judicial Branch), specialist doctors and the employees  covered 
under clause (a) of rule 4.4, shall be entitled to receive the fixed monthly emoluments, 
during the period of his probation:  
                   Provided  further  that  when  the  services  of  a  Government  employee,  who  was 
receiving fixed monthly emoluments during the period of probation are confirmed, the 
period spent on probation by him, shall not be treated to be the time spent on the time 
scale applicable to his post. 
                    Explanation.–The expression “fixed monthly emoluments” means the amount 
drawn monthly by a Government employee equal to the minimum of the pay band of 
the  service  or  post to  which  he  is  appointed and  shall  not  include  grade  pay,  special 
pay, annual increment or any other allowance, except travelling allowance drawn with 
reference to the grade pay of the relevant service or post. It shall also not include any 
other emoluments which may be specifically classed as part of pay by the competent 
authority, as provided in rule 2.44(b). 
                   (1A) The provisions of sub-rule (1), shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent  therewith  contained  in  these  rules  or  other  rules  for  the  time  being  in 
force. 
          (2)  Notwithstanding  the  restriction  referred  to  in  or  imposed  by  clause  (1) 
above, a competent authority may grant to any Government employee:– 
            (i)   personal pay as defined in clause (a) of rule 2.47, or 
      (ii)   special pay as defined in rule 2.52 or 
      (iii)  both personal pay and special pay. 
          Note 1. Omitted.           
          Note 2.  Omitted. 
          Note 3.– (a)  The  following  principles  should  be  strictly  observed  for  the  grant  of 
personal pay as defined in rule 2.47:– 
          

38 
[4.1-4.4] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. IV] 
           No  application  for  the  grant  of  compensatory  personal  pay  should  be  entertained 
unless– 
(i) the Government employee‟s service has consistently been of exceptional merit; 
 
(ii) the  Government  employee  is  fit  for  promotion,  but  there  is  no  normal  avenue  of 
promotion within his line, and  
(iii) the Government employee has been at least 5 years on the same pay, or if his pay is 
progressive, on the maximum pay of his post and that he must have put in 20 years 
of continuous Government service. 
           (b)  The  mere  fulfilment  of  the  conditions  mentioned  above  should  not  be  regarded  as 
securing  a  personal  pay  to  a  Government  employee  as  a matter  of  course,  the  purpose  of  the 
conditions being to enable obviously weak claims to be summarily rejected. 
           (c)  Individual  cases  of  Government  employees  who  hold  isolated  posts  which  form  a 
cadre by themselves in a particular office, will not be covered normally under this rule. 
         4.2. Omitted. 
          4.3. In respect of any period treated as duty under rule 2.16 (b), a Government 
employee may be granted such pay as the competent authority may consider equitable  
but in no case exceeding the pay which the Government employee would have drawn 
had he been on duty other than duty under rule 2.16 (b). 
         Explanation 1. Omitted. 
         Explanation 2. Omitted. 
          Note. Omitted. 
                FIXATION OF INITIAL PAY 
          4.4.  The  initial  substantive  pay  of  a  Government  employee  who  is  appointed 
substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay is regulated as follows:– 
          (a)    If he holds a lien on a permanent post, other than a tenure post– 
  (i) when  appointment  to  the  new  post  involves  the  assumption  of  duties  or 
responsibilities  of  greater  importance  (as  interpreted  for  the  purposes  of 
rule  4.13)  than  these  attaching  to  such  permanent  post,  he  will  draw  as 
initial  pay the  stage  of  the  time-scale  next  above  his  substantive  pay  in 
respect of the old post; 
      (ii)   when appointment to the new  post  does  not  involve  such assumption,  he 
will draw as  initial pay the stage of the time-scale which is equal to  his           
substantive pay in respect of the old post, or, if there is no such stage, the 
stage next below that pay plus personal pay equal to the difference; and in 
either case will continue to draw that pay until such time as he would have  

39 
[Chap.  IV]           PAY             [4.4] 
               received an  increment  in  the  time-scale  of  the  old  post  or  for  the  period 
after  which  an  increment  is  earned  in  the  time-scale  of  the  new  post, 
whichever is less.  But if the minimum of the time-scale of the new post is 
higher than his substantive pay in respect of the old post he will draw that 
minimum as initial pay; 
 (iii)    when appointment to the new post is made on his own request under rule 
3.17  (a)  and  maximum  pay  in  the  time-scale  of  that  post  is  less  than  his 
substantive pay in respect of the old post, he will draw that maximum as 
initial pay.       
           Note.  Omitted. 
        (b)  If  the  conditions  prescribed  in  clause  (a)  are  not  fulfilled,  he  will  draw  as 
initial  pay  the  minimum  of  the  time-scale,  on appointment  in  Government service in 
the  case of  member  of  Punjab  Civil  Service  (Judicial Branch), specialist doctors and 
on completion of probation in other cases: 
           Provided  both in cases  covered  by clause (a) and in cases, other than  cases of      
re-employment  after  resignation  or  removal or  dismissal  from  the  public  service, 
covered by clause (b), that if he either – 
           (1)   has previously held substantively or officiated in – 
 (i)   the same post, or 
(ii)   a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale, or  
(iii)  a  permanent  post  other  than  a  tenure  post  or  a  temporary  post 
(including  a  post  in  a  body,  incorporated  or  not,  which  is  wholly  or 
substantially owned or controlled by the Government) on an identical 
time-scale; or 
       (2)    is  appointed  substantively  to  a  tenure  post  on  a  time-scale  identical  with 
that of another tenure post which he has previously held substantively or in  
which  he  has  previously  officiated,  then  the  initial  pay  shall  not  be  less 
than the pay, other than special pay, personal pay or emoluments classed as 
pay  by  the  competent  authority  under  rule 2.44(b), which  he  drew  on  the 
last  such  occasion,  and  he  shall  count for  increments  the  period  during 
which  he  drew  that  pay  on  such  last  and  any  previous  occasions  for 
increment in the stage of the time-scale equivalent to that pay. If, however, 
the  pay  last  drawn by  the Government employee in a temporary post has 
been  inflated  by  the grant  of  premature  increments  the  pay which  he   
would have drawn but for grant  of these increments shall unless otherwise  

40 
[4.4] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
               ordered by the authority competent to create the new post, be taken for the                
purposes of this proviso to be the pay which he last drew  in the temporary                 
post.  
          The service rendered in a post referred to in proviso (1) (iii) shall, on reversion 
to the  parent cadre,  count towards initial fixation of pay, to the  extent and subject to 
the conditions indicated below:– 
            (i)   The Government employee should have been approved for appointment to 
the particular grade/post in which the previous service is to be counted; 
 (ii)   all his seniors, except those regarded as unfit for such appointment, were 
serving in posts carrying the scale of pay in which benefit is to be allowed 
or  in  higher  posts,  whether  in  the  department  itself  or  elsewhere,  and  at 
least one junior was holding a post in the Department carrying the scale of 
pay in which the benefit is to be allowed; and 
  (iii)   the service will count from the date his junior is promoted and the benefit 
will  be  limited  to the  period  the  Government  employee  would  have  held 
the  post  in  his  parent  cadre  had  he  not  been  appointed  to  the  ex-cadre 
post. 
       The previous service rendered in the same post on identical time scale or a post 
having identical two/three/four tier scales of pay or in which  time  bound placements 
or  grant  of  higher  pay  scales  are  provided  as  in  the  new  post  in    a  Government 
Department   shall,   in   addition   to   the   protection   of   pay   actually   drawn in   the 
corresponding  scale  under  the  rule,  count his previous  service  in  the  cadre  of 
transferee Department for the purpose  of Assured Career Progression Scheme as per 
instructions  issued  by  the  Punjab  Government  from  time  to  time.  This  benefit  is 
allowed to the junior employee as a measure personal to him and without creating any 
right for the senior employee to claim equality in pay and  pay scale  with junior who 
receives higher pay/pay scale due to his previous service and such employee will not 
be entitled to take benefit of his previous service towards seniority. 
          (c) (i) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, where a Government 
employee  holding  a  post  in  a  temporary  or  officiating  capacity  is  promoted  or 
appointed in a substantive, temporary or officiating capacity to another post carrying 
duties and responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the post held 
by  him,  his  initial  pay  in  the  time  scale  of  the  higher  post  shall  be  fixed  at  the  stage 
next above his pay drawn by him in the lower post provided it is certified by the Head 
of  the    Department  in  which  the  Government  employee  was  holding  the  lower  post 
that   he   would   have   continued   to   officiate   in   the   lower   post   but   for   his 
promotion/appointment to the higher post: 

41 
[Chap.  IV]           PAY             [4.4] 
           Provided that if a Government employee either – 
 (a)   has previously held substantively or officiated in – 
       (i)    the same post, or 
      (ii)    a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale, of 
 (iii)  a permanent  post  other  than  a  tenure  post,  or  a  temporary  post     
(including a  post in a  body, incorporated  or not, which is  wholly or 
substantially   owned   or   controlled   by   the   Government) on an 
identical time-scale ; or 
(b)   is  appointed  substantively  to  a  tenure  post  on  a  time-scale  identical  with 
that of another tenure post which he has previously held substantively or in 
which he has previously officiated ;  
        then proviso  to rule  4.4 (b) shall apply in the matter of the  initial fixation 
of pay and counting of previous service for increment. 
(ii)  The provisions of sub-rule 2 of rule 4.14 shall also be applicable in any case 
where  the  initial  pay  is  fixed  under  this clause.    In  cases,  where a Government 
employee  is,  immediately  before  his  promotion  or  appointment  to  a  higher  post, 
drawing pay at the maximum of the time scale of the lower post, his initial pay in the 
time  scale  of  the higher  post  shall  be  fixed  in  the  same  manner  as  provided  in          
sub-clause (1) above. 
          Explanation.–Reversion  to  the  ordinary  cadre  of  service  from  a  tenure  post 
included  in  that  cadre  or  from  a  tenure  or  special  post  not  included  in  it,  does  not 
constitute substantive appointment to a post for the purpose of this rule. 
           Note.–For  the  purposes  of  rule  4.1  and  4.4,  a  specialist  doctor  shall  mean  a  M.B.B.S. 
doctor,  who  possesses  a  Post  Graduate  degree  in  any  medical  speciality,  or  a  Post  Graduate 
diploma   in   the   specialities   of   Radiology,   Anaesthesia,   Paediatrics,   Gynaecology   and 
Psychology. 
           Note  1.–When  a  Government  employee  is  appointed  to  a  higher  post  on  the  date  on 
which his increment in the lower substantive post falls due, his substantive pay for the purpose 
of fixing his initial pay in the higher post shall be  inclusive of his increment accruing on that 
date. 
           Note 2.  Omitted. 
           Note  3.–When  the  next  increment  in  the  time-scale  of either the  new  or old  post  falls 
due,  the  Government  employee  should  draw  the  next  increment  in  the  time-scale  of  the  new 
post,  and  forthwith  lose  the  personal  pay  allowed  under  clause  (a)  (ii)  of  this  rule  and  all 
connections  with  the  time-scale  of  his  old  post.  The  personal  pay  is  given  to  a  Government 
employee  only  for  the  purpose  of  initial  pay  and  not  any  subsequent  stage  in  the  new  time-
scale in which the Government employee might draw less pay than he  would have drawn had 
he remained in the old time-scale. 

42 
[4.4] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
         Note 4.  Omitted. 
           Note 5.– See also notes 3 and 4 under rule 4.6.      
           Note 6.–Under rule 4.4 and 4.13, it is necessary for the purpose of fixing the initial pay 
of a Government employee transferred from one post to another on a different scale of pay in a 
substantive  or  officiating  capacity,  to  determine  the  degree  of  responsibility  attaching  to  the 
two posts. A declaration as to the relative degree of responsibility shall, therefore, be necessary 
and  will be  given by the  competent authority.   Such declarations  will,  however, be  necessary 
only in cases where there is some doubt as to the relative degree of responsibilities attaching to 
the two posts. 
           Note  7.–The intention underlying the restrictive sub-clause of the proviso to clause (b) 
of this rule is to prevent men, who were given enhanced rates of pay when competition in the 
labour  market  was  keen  and  qualified  men  scarce,  from  carrying  the  inflated  pay  with  them 
after  those  conditions  had  abated  to  any  other  posts  to  which  they  might  be  appointed.  
Accordingly  this  sub-clause  applies  even  in  the  case  of  a  temporary  Government  employee 
who is appointed to another temporary post on the abolition of his previous temporary post or 
for other reasons.  In the latter case, however, when the transfer has been made in the interest 
of  public  service,  the  restriction  in  question  may  be  relaxed  by  the  authority  competent  to 
create the post. 
The word “minimum of the scale” appearing in the restrictive sub-clause of the proviso should 
be  taken  to  mean  the  minimum  of  the  previous  post  in  which  the  advance  increments  were 
granted. 
         Note  8.–It  is  permissible  to  post-date  the  substantive  promotion  of  a  Government 
employee to a higher post up to a date when it will be to his benefit to be promoted under the 
operation  of  this  rule.    This  date  may  be  selected  at  the  option  of  the  Government  employee 
concerned,  which  must  be  exercised  within  six  months  from  the  date  of  order  making  the 
promotion  and  when  once  exercised  must  be  final.    No  compensation  will  be  given  for  any 
consequences  which  may  follow  from  the  exercise  of  this  option.    When  the  option  has  been 
exercised,  an  entry  should  be  made  to  this  effect  in  the  service book  of  the  Government 
employee concerned and attested by the Head of the Office. 
          These orders will apply to promotions in the same class of appointments and not to cases 
where there is complete change in the  nature of the appointment and they should be confined 
to departments or establishments divided into grades. 
           For  so  long  as  the  promotion  is  deferred  under  the  orders  in  paragraph  1  above,  the 
place in the employee grade will remain vacant, but promotions can be made in the place of the 
Government  employee  who  would  have  been  promoted  from  the  date,  the  vacancy  originally 
occurred as if the promotion had actually taken place on that date.  All that would happen is an 
excess appointment in the  lower grade  against a  vacancy  left unfilled in the  higher  grade  and 
this is permissible under rule 7.15 of the Punjab Financial Rules, Volume I. 
           Note 9. Omitted.  

43 
 [Chap.  IV]           PAY             [4.4] 
                               Note 10.–In  those  cases, where  there  is  some  doubt  as  to  the  relative  degree  of  duties                     
and  responsibilities  attaching  to  the  two  posts, the  same  shall  be  determined  by  keeping    in  
view the  following factors:– 
(i) the relative  degree  of  duties  and  responsibilities  of  two  posts  shall  be  determined 
with  reference  to  the  entry  scale  of  the  post  held by  an  employee.  The  higher  scale  or  higher 
grade pay granted to an employee on such post under an Assured Career Progression Scheme 
or otherwise, shall not be taken into account; 
          (ii)  a post having the lower minimum of the entry scale of pay or lower grade pay, shall 
generally be considered the lower post as compared to a post carrying higher minimum of time 
scale or higher grade pay; and  
          (iii) where  the  entry  pay  scales  of  both  the  higher  and  lower  posts  are  identical,  the 
higher and lower posts  shall  be  determined by the  Administrative  Department in consultation 
with the Department of Finance. 
  FIXATION OF INITIAL PAY UNDER THE REVISED PAY STRUCTURE 
 4.4-A. Subject  to  the  provisions of  rule 4.4, the initial pay of a Government 
employee, who is governed by the revised pay structure, is regulated as follows:– 
  (i)  when  appointment  to  the  new  post involves  the  assumption  of  duties  or 
responsibilities of greater importance than those attaching to the old post on which he 
holds a lien, his initial pay shall be fixed by granting him the benefit of one increment 
and the grade pay of the new post; 
  (ii) when   appointment   to   the   new   post   does   not   involve   duties   and 
responsibilities of greater importance he shall draw as initial pay, which is equal to the 
substantive  pay  in  respect  of  the  old  post.  However,  the  higher  grade  pay, if  any 
admissible  under  this clause shall  be  absorbed  at  the  time  of  grant  of  benefit  of 
fixation of pay under an Assured Career Progression Scheme; and  
            (iii) when a Government employee is appointed to a post carrying lower grade 
pay  on  his  own  request  under  rule  3.17(a),  his  initial  pay  shall  be  fixed  equal  to  the 
pay-in-pay  band  drawn  by  him  in  the  old  post  plus  the  grade  pay  of  the  new  post. 
However, if the maximum of the pay band in the time scale of lower post is less than 
his substantive pay in respect of the old post, his initial pay shall be fixed equal to the 
maximum of the pay band plus the grade pay of the new post.  
            Explanation.–The expression “revised pay structure” means the pay structure 
consisting of running pay bands and grade pay which came into force with effect from 
the 1
st 
day of January, 2006 under the provisions of the Punjab Civil Services (Revised 
Pay) Rules, 2009. 
             Note.–The pay of the Government employees, who are promoted in the  higher grade, 
shall continue to be regulated in accordance with the provisions of rule 11 of the Punjab Civil 
Services (Revised Pay) Rules, 2009.  

44 
[4.5-4.5A]    THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
           4.5.  The  initial  substantive  pay  of  a  Government  employee  who is  appointed 
substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay which has been reduced for reason other 
than a diminution in the duties or responsibilities attached to posts thereon and who is 
not entitled to draw pay on the time-scale as it stood prior to reduction, is regulated by 
rule  4.4:  Provided,  in  cases,  other  than  cases  of  re-employment  after  resignation  or 
removal  or  dismissal  from  the  public  service,  covered  by  clause  (a)  or  clause  (b)  of 
that rule if he either – 
  (1) has previously held substantively or officiated in – 
                (i)   the same post prior to reduction of its time-scale, or 
               (ii)   a permanent or temporary post on the same time-scale  as the unreduced     
time  scale of the post, or 
               (iii)  a permanent  post  other  than  a  tenure  post,  or  a  temporary  post,  on  a 
time-scale  of  pay  identical  with  the  unreduced  time  scale  of  the  post, 
such temporary post being on the time-scale as a permanent post, or 
(2) is appointed substantively to a tenure post, the time-scale of which has been 
reduced  without  a  diminution  in  the  duties  or  responsibilities  attached  to  it,  and  has 
previously  held  substantively  or  officiated  in  another  tenure  post  on  a  time-scale 
identical with the unreduced time-scale of the tenure post, then the initial pay shall not 
be  less  than  the  pay,  other  than  special  pay,  personal  pay  or  emoluments  classed  as 
pay by the competent authority under rule 2.44(b), which he would have drawn under 
rule 4.4 on the last such occasion, if the reduced time-scale  of pay had  been in force 
from  the  beginning  and  he  shall  count  for  increments  the  period  during  which  he 
would  have  drawn  that  pay  on  such  last  and  any  previous  occasion:  Provided  that 
service rendered on pay at a stage in a time-scale which is less than the minimum of 
the revised scale shall not count for increment in that scale. 
Note 1. Omitted. 
         4.5-A. (1) Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  rules,  the  following 
provisions  shall  govern  the  pay  of  a  Government  employee  who  is appointed  as  a 
probationer in another Service or cadre, and subsequently confirmed in that Service or 
cadre – 
          (a) during  the  period  of  probation  he  shall  draw  pay  at  the  minimum  of  the    
time-scale or at the probationary stages of the time-scale of the service or post, as the 
case may be: 
   Provided that if the presumptive pay of the permanent post, other than a tenure 
post, on which he holds a lien, should at any time be greater than the pay fixed under 
this clause, he shall draw the presumptive pay of the permanent post; 
           

45 
  [Chap.  IV]  PAY       [4.5A-4.6] 
          (b) on confirmation  in  the  service  or  post  after  the  expiry  of  the  period  of 
probation, the pay of the Government employee shall be fixed in the time-scale of the 
Service or post in accordance with the provisions of Rule 4.4. 
          (2)  The  provisions  contained  in  sub-rule  (1)  shall  apply mutatis  mutandis to 
cases  of  Government  employees  appointed  on  probation  with  definite  conditions 
against  temporary  posts  in  another  Service  or  cadre  where  recruitment  to  permanent 
posts  of  such  Service  or  cadre  is  made  as probationers,  except that  in  such  cases  the 
fixation  of  pay  in  the  manner  indicated  in  clause  (b)  of  sub-rule  (1)  shall  be  done 
under Rule 4.14 of these  Rules immediately on the  expiry of the period of probation 
and on regular officiating appointment to a post, either permanent or temporary in the 
Service or cadre. 
          (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules, a Government employee 
appointed as an apprentice in another Service or cadre shall draw – 
          (a)  during the  period of apprenticeship, the  stipend  or pay prescribed  for such 
period provided that if the presumptive pay of the permanent post, other than a tenure 
post, on which  he  holds  a lien, should at any time  be  greater than the stipend  or pay 
fixed under this clause he shall draw the presumptive pay of the permanent post; 
          (b)  on satisfactory completion of the apprenticeship and regular appointment to 
a post in the Service or cadre, the pay as fixed in the time-scale of the Service or post 
under Rule 4.4 or 4.4 (c) or 4.14 of these Rules. 
         4.6.  The  holder  of  a  post  the  pay  of  which  is  changed  shall  be  treated  as  if  he 
were  transferred  to  a  new  post  on  the  new  pay;  subject  to  such  restrictions  as  the 
competent authority may in each case lay down. 
          Note 1.–This rule applies to an officiating as well as to a substantive holder of a post. 
          Note 2.–If the maximum pay of a post is altered with no change in the rate of increment 
and  the  minimum,  the  initial  pay  of  the holder  of  that  post  should  be  fixed  under  rule               
4.4 (a) (ii) and not under rule 4.4 (a) (i)  even though he may be holding the post substantively.  
See also note 4 below. 
          Note  3.–For  the  purpose  of  rules  4.4  and  4.6  a  temporary  post on  a  certain  rate  of  pay 
(fixed or time-scale)  which is converted into a permanent post on the  same  or a different rate 
of pay is not the “same post” as the permanent post even though the duties remain the same. In 
other words in view of rule 2.58, the temporary post is to be regarded as having ceased to exist 
and to have been replaced by the permanent post. The incumbent of the temporary post, is thus 
entitled only to the pay of permanent post if it is on a fixed rate of pay or to the minimum pay 
of the time scale of the permanent post if it is on a time-scale unless his case is covered by the 
concession admissible under proviso (i), (ii) and (i), (iii) to rule 4.4.  Consequently, service in a 
temporary  post,  created  on  a  certain  scale  of  pay  when  converted into  a  permanent  post  on  a 
different scale or pay, will not count for increments in the latter scale. 

46 
[4.6-4.8]  THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
          Note 4.–The orders in note 3 above do not refer to cases of transfer from one temporary 
post  to  another  such  post  or  from  a  temporary  post  to  a  permanent  post.    Nor  do  they  debar 
service in a temporary post, created as an addition to a cadre, and on the same time-scale, from 
counting towards increments in a permanent post in that cadre even after such a temporary post 
has been abolished. 
                                        INCREMENTS 
         4.7.  An  increment  shall  ordinarily  be  drawn  as  a  matter  of course,  unless  it  is 
withheld. An   increment  may   be   withheld   from   a   Government   employee   by   a 
competent  authority  if  his  conduct  has  not  been  good  or  his  work  has  not  been 
satisfactory.  In  ordering  the  withholding  of  an  increment,  the  withholding  authority 
shall  state  the  period  for  which  it  is  withheld,  and  whether  the  postponement  shall 
have the effect of postponing future increments. 
         Note.–In the case of an officer/official who does not fulfil the basic condition laid down 
in  the  respective  Service  Rules  regarding  the  minimum  number  of  years  of  service,  in  the 
lower rank  and  who  is  promoted  to  a  higher  post  by  invoking  an  alternative  provision  in  the 
relevant rules specifying the extent of relaxation of the basic condition, referred to above, the 
initial pay in his case would be the minimum of the post to which he is promoted/appointed till 
he fulfils the condition of completing the basic minimum period of service prescribed and the 
first annual increment will be granted after one year of the date of completion of the minimum 
length of qualifying service/experience, necessary for appointment to the service, cadre or the 
post. In other words for the purpose of 1st increment his appointment shall be deemed to have 
started  on  the  date  on  which  he  completes  the  minimum  qualifying  service/experience,  as  is 
necessary  for  appointment  to  the  service, cadre  or  the  post  concerned.  This  restriction  will 
however not apply in cases where the officer/official was drawing pay more than the minimum 
of  the  higher  post.  In  such  cases  pay  shall  be  fixed  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of rule 
4.4 of these rules. The first annual increment in such a case also will, however, be granted after 
one year of the date of completion of the minimum length of qualifying service/experience. 
              ASSURED CAREER PROGRESSION SCHEME 
                4.8. A Government employee is  entitled  to the  benefit of fixation of pay under 
the Assured Career Progression Scheme notified by the Government from time to time 
subject to such terms and conditions, as may be specified:                  
                 Provided  that  grant  of  benefit  of  such  Scheme,  shall  also  be  subject  to  the 
following general terms and conditions:– 
               (a) a Government employee, who forgoes promotion offered to him, shall not be 
eligible for benefits under the Assured Career Progression Scheme; and 
                 (b) only the Service which counts for seniority and increments in a cadre against 
a  post,  shall  be  reckoned  for  the  grant  of  benefit  under  the  Assured  Career 
Progression Scheme.      
 

47 
[Chap. V]  PAY                [4.9] 
              4.9. The following provisions prescribe the conditions on which service counts    
   for increments in a time-scale:– 
(a)  All duty in a  post on a time-scale  counts  for increments  in that time-scale: 
provided that, for the purpose of arriving at the date of the next increment in that time-
scale the total of all such periods as do not count for increment in that time-scale shall 
be added to the normal date of increment. 
           Note 1.– See also clause (e) of this rule. 
           Note 2.–In the case of a Government employee who, while officiating in a post, proceeds 
on  training  or  to  attend  a  course  of  instruction  and  who  is  treated  as  on  duty  while  under 
training,  these  periods  of  such  duty  will  count  for  increment  in  the  post  in  which  he  was 
officiating  prior  to  his  being  sent  for  training  or  instruction  for  which  he  is  allowed  the  pay  of 
the officiating post during such period.           
          Exception 1.–The period of training at Phillaur of  probationary  Inspectors  and 
Sub-Inspectors  of Police  during which time  they draw pay below the  minimum rates 
in  the  time-scale  of  pay  counts  towards  increments  in  the  time-scales  applicable  to 
them. 
           Exception 2.–The period of training spent by Probationary Inspectors of Police 
in  districts,  during  which  time  they  draw  pay  below  the  minimum  rates  of  the  time-
scales applicable to them, counts towards increments in such time-scales. 
         Note  3.–A  period  of  overstayal  of  leave  does  not  count towards  increments  in  a  time-
scale unless under rule 8.121 (b) it is converted into extraordinary leave and under the proviso 
to clause (b) below, the extraordinary leave is specially allowed to count for increments. 
           Note 4.–If a probationer, other than a probationer receiving fixed monthly emoluments,  
is  confirmed  at  the  end  of  a  period  of  probation  exceeding  twelve  months,  he  is  entitled  to 
claim retrospectively the increments, which but for his probation he would have received in the 
ordinary  course.  This  provision  is  applicable  only  to  cases  where  the  normal  probationary 
period  itself  is  more  than  twelve  months and  not  to  the  type  of  cases  where  the  normal 
probationary  period  of  a  probationer  is  extended  on  account  of  his  failure  to  pass  the 
departmental examination  within the  time  limit prescribed for the  purpose. In other  words, in 
cases where the normal probationary period is itself more than twelve months, on confirmation 
the officer may be given the increments which he would have drawn but for his probation, and 
arrears in this regard may also  be allowed to the  officer. On the other hand, in cases where the 
period  of  probation  is  extended  on  account  of  failure  to  pass  the  departmental  examination 
while  there  is  no  objection  to  the  pay  and  increments  being  regulated  on  confirmation  at  the 
end of the extended probationary period on the basis of what the officer would have drawn but 
for his probation no arrears on this account should be allowed to him for the period prior to the 
date  of  confirmation.  This  would  mean  that  the  increment  of  the  officer  is  withheld  without 
cumulative effect for failure to pass the departmental examination and cannot be considered as 
a penalty within the meaning of Rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) 
Rules, 1970. 

48 
[4.9] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
          (b) (i) Service in another post other than a post carrying less pay referred to in 
clause  (a)  of  rule  3.17,  whether  in  a  substantive,  or  officiating capacity,  service  on 
deputation out of India  and leave  except extraordinary leave  taken otherwise than on 
medical  certificate  count  for  increments  in  the  time-scale  applicable  to  the  post  on 
which the Government employee holds a lien. 
           (ii) All  leave  except  extraordinary  leave  taken  otherwise  than  on  medical 
certificate  and  the  period  of  deputation  out  of  India  shall  count  for  increment  in  the 
time-scale applicable to a post in which a Government employee was officiating at the 
time  he  proceeded  on  leave  or  deputation  out  of  India  and  would  have  continued  to 
officiate but for his proceeding on leave or deputation out of India: 
           Provided  that the  competent  authority  may  in  any  case  in  which  it is  satisfied 
that  the  extraordinary  leave  was taken  for  any  cause  beyond  the  Government 
employee‟s control or for prosecuting higher scientific and technical studies, direct 
that extraordinary leave shall be counted for increments under clause (i) or (ii). 
           Note  1.–The  period of  annual  holidays  with  wages  corresponding  to  earned  leave  will 
count towards increments in the case of temporary workmen governed by the Factories Act in 
grades in which the appointing authority will in each case certify that the workman concerned 
would  have  actually  continued  to  work  in  that  grade,  but  for  his  proceeding  on  leave  and  the 
period of leave  will count for increments only to the  extent it is covered by the certificate. A 
permanent workman working in a higher grade in an officiating capacity may also count such 
leave towards increments in that higher post subject to the certificate in the case of temporary 
workmen. 
          Note 2.–In the case of Group „C‟ and Group „D‟ Government employees, whenever the 
requisite  certificate  under this  rule  is  issued  by  the  Administrative  Authority,  a  very  concise 
entry such as “Certificate under rule 4.9 (b) (ii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, 
Part I  issued for  the  period  from  ________to  _________should  be  recorded  after  the  entry 
regarding leave in the service book. 
           Note  3.–In  the  case  of  Government  employees  engaged  on  contract  who  are  governed 
by  the  leave  terms  mentioned  in appendix  16  in  Part II of  this  Volume,  certificate  under  rule       
4.9(b)(ii)  may  be  dispensed with  where  such  officers  are  appointed  on  contract  to  specific 
posts and proceed on leave from these posts.  
         Note  4.–In  the  case  of  officers  who  are  given  contracts  without  specifying  any 
particular  posts and  other contract  officers, who,  though appointed  initially  in  specific  posts, 
are  transferred  in  an  officiating  capacity  to  other  posts,  and  who  proceed  on  leave  thereafter, 
the  certificate  under  rule  4.9  (b)  (ii)  will  be  necessary  to  count  the  period  of  such  leave  for 
increments  in  the  posts which  they  hold  in  an  officiating  capacity  immediately  prior  to 
proceeding on leave. 
          Note  5.–In  the  case  of  a  Government  employee  proceeding  on  leave,  where  no 
officiating arrangement is  made  in the  leave  vacancy and the  Government employee is likely 
to  return  to  the  same post after leave, the certificate that he would have actually continued to  

49 
 [Chap.  IV]  PAY                [4.9] 
officiate in  the  post  but  for  his  proceeding  on  leave  shall  be  issued  by  the  leave  sanctioning 
authority at the time of grant of leave. 
          In all other cases, the certificate shall be issued by the appointing authority.         
         Exception.–The  above certificate  in  respect  of  all  the  employees  of  the  Punjab 
Vidhan Sabha should be issued by the Secretary and in respect of the Secretary Punjab 
Vidhan Sabha by the Speaker, Punjab Vidhan Sabha. 
        Note  6.–In  the  case  of  temporary/officiating  Government  employees,  a  certificate  that 
Government  employee  concerned  would  have  continued  to  officiate  in  that  post  but  for  his 
proceeding  on  extraordinary  leave  is  necessary  and  the  period  of  extraordinary  leave  would 
count for increment only to the extent covered by the certificate. 
          Note  7.–Quasi  permanent  Government  employees  will  be  treated  in  the  same  way  as 
permanent  Government  employee  in  respect  of  the  specified  post  in  which  they  have  been 
declared  quasi-permanent,  but  in  respect  of  other  posts in  which  they  may  be  officiating  the 
certificate of continued officiation as envisaged in clause (b) (ii) would be necessary as in the 
case of temporary Government employees. 
         (c)  (i)  If  a  Government  employee,  while  officiating  in  a  post  or  holding a 
temporary post on a time-scale pay, is appointed to officiate in a higher post or to hold 
a higher temporary post, his officiating or temporary service in the higher post, shall, 
if he is re-appointed to the lower post or is appointed or reappointed to a post on the 
same time scale of pay count for increments in the time-scale applicable to such lower 
post.  The period of officiating service in the higher post which counts for increment 
in  the  lower  is,  however,  restricted  to  the  period  during  which  the Government 
employee  would  have  officiated  in  the  lower  post  but  for  his  appointment  to  the 
higher. 
 This  clause  applies  also  to  a  Government  employee  who  is  not  actually 
officiating in the lower post, at the time of his appointment to the higher post, but who 
would have so officiated in such lower post or in a post on the same scale of pay had 
he not been appointed to the higher post. 
 (ii) If a Government employee on reversion from an ex-cadre post to the parent 
cadre is appointed to a post on a scale lower than that of the ex-cadre post but not on 
the same time-scale as the post held at the time of his transfer to the ex-cadre post, the 
service rendered on the higher scale in the ex-cadre post shall count for increments in 
the  time-scale  applicable  to  the cadre  post subject to the  conditions  as are laid  down 
for cases falling under proviso (i) (iii) to Rule 4.4 (b). 
 Note 1.–For the purpose of clause (c) of this rule, the officiating and temporary service 
in  higher  post  will  also  include  the  periods  or  all leave,  except  extraordinary  leave  taken 
otherwise  than  on  medical  certificate, provided it is certified by the appointing authority that  

50 
 [4.9-4.9A]  THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
the Government employee would have actually officiated in the lower post but for proceeding 
on leave while officiating in the higher post. 
         Note 2.–These benefits shall also be extended to State Government employees officiating 
in higher posts or holding higher temporary posts under the Central Government. 
(d)  Foreign service counts for increments in the time-scale applicable to,– 
 (i) the  post  in  Government  service  on  which  the  Government  employee 
concerned holds a lien, and 
(ii)   any post  in  the  parent  cadre  on  a  lower  scale  of  pay  to  which  the 
Government  employee  is  appointed  on  reversion  from  the  ex-cadre  post 
subject to the  fulfilment of the  conditions  mentioned in proviso (1) (ii) to 
Rule 4.4 (b). 
(iii)  the  post  in  Government  service  in  which  the  Government  employee  was 
officiating immediately before his transfer to foreign service, for so long as  
        he  would  have  continued  to  officiate  in  that  post  or  a  post  on  the  same 
time-scale but for his going on foreign service. 
  (e) Joining time counts for increment,– 
(i) If  it  is  under  clause  (a)  or  clause  (c)  of  Rule  9.1,  in  the  time-scale 
applicable  to  the  post  on  which  a  Government  employee  holds  a  lien as 
well  as  in  the  time-scale  applicable  to  the  post,  the  pay  of  which  is 
received by a Government employee during the period; and  
 (ii) If  it  is  under  clause  (b)  of  rule  9.1  in  the  time-scale  applicable  to  the 
post/posts in which the last day of leave before the commencement of the 
joining time counts for increment. 
          4.9-A.  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  the  foregoing  rule,  the  annual 
increments shall be allowed with effect from the first day of the month in which they 
fall due under the normal rules regulating increments. 
           Note  1.–The increment of an employee on leave due on the first day of the  month will 
be  drawn  from  the  date  of  resuming  his  duty  on  return  from  leave,  because  during  leave  the 
employee gets leave salary only. 
           Note 2.–In cases in which there is postponement due to employees proceeding on leave 
without  pay  which  is  not  counted  for  increment,  normal  increment  will  be  granted  from  the 
first  day  of  the  month  in  which  the  postponed  increment,  as  worked-out  under  the  existing 
rules and orders, falls. 
           Note  3.–In  a  case  where  the  date  of  appointment  of  an  employee  is 19
th
 December, 
1975, he will be given increment on 1
st
 December, 1976 before completing 12 months service.  
 

51 
  [Chap.  IV]  PAY   [4.9A-4.11] 
Similarly,  when  he  is  promoted  to  a  higher  grade  on  19
th
 December,  1976  he  will  get 
increment on 1
st
 December, 1977 before completing 12 months service in officiating grade.              
                                 Note  4.–The  periods of service  at the  same  stage  count  for increment.  In regard to the 
point  whether  increment  is  to  be  allowed  on  the  specific  date  when  the  employee  completes 
one year‟s service at the same stage or on the first day of the month, when by counting those 
broken periods the  date  of next increment falls on a  date  later than the first day of the  month 
the increment will be payable from the first day of the month in which the next increment falls 
due, after counting the  broken periods equal  to one  year, provided the  Government employee 
has also been holding the post from the first day of that month to the date it falls due.  In case 
he is not holding the post on the first day of the month, the increment will be granted from the 
date it falls due. 
         Note  5.–Where  the  normal  increment  is  withheld  for  specific  period  and  the  period  of 
such penalty expires after first day of the month, increment will be granted or restored from the 
date of the penalty ceases. 
           Note  6.–This  rule  is  not  applicable  to  advance  or  enhanced  increments  which  are 
allowed  as  a  result  of  passing of  certain  examinations.  Such  increments,  if  possible,  will  be 
governed by separate rules and orders. 
         4.10.  Subject  to  any  general  or  special  orders  that  may  be  made  by  the 
competent authority in this behalf, an authority may grant a premature increment. 
           Note  1.–A proposal to grant an increment in advance of the due date should always be 
scrutinized with special jealousy as it is contrary to the principle of a time-scale of pay to grant 
an increment before it is due.  Such a grant should not be made or advised except in very rare 
circumstances  which  would  justify  a  personal  pay  to  a  Government  employee  whose  pay  is 
fixed. 
           Note 2.–The expression “scale of pay” represents the maximum of the scale which is to 
be  taken  into  account for  determining  the  authority  competent  to  sanction  increments  rather 
than the stage of it. 
           Note 3.–The grant of premature increments to members of the Provincial Civil Medical 
Service is governed by the rules in Appendix XI to the Punjab Medical Manual.       
           Note 4.–In the case of increments granted in advance, it is usually the intention that the 
Government  employee  should  be  entitled  to  increments  in  the  same  manner,  as  if  he had 
reached his position in the scale in the ordinary course and in the absence of special orders to 
the contrary he should be placed on exactly the same footing, as regards future increments, as a 
Government employee, who has so risen. 
       TRANSFER FROM A HIGHER TO A LOWER GRADE OR FROM                  
A HIGHER STAGE TO A LOWER STAGE 
         4.11.  The  authority  which  orders  the  transfer  of  a  Government  employee  as  a 
penalty  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  grade  or  post  may  allow  him  to  draw  any  pay,  not 
exceeding the maximum of the lower grade or post, which it may think proper: 

52 
 [4.11-4.12] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
Provided  that  the  pay  allowed  to  be  drawn  by  a  Government  employee  under 
this rule shall not exceed the pay which he would have drawn by the operation of rule 
4.5 read with clause (b) or clause (c), as the case may be, of rule 4.9. 
         4.12.  (1)  If  a  Government  employee  is  reduced  as  a  measure  of  penalty  to  a 
lower  stage  in  his  time-scale,  the  authority,  ordering  such  reduction  shall  state  the 
period  for  which  it  shall  be  effective  and  whether,  on  restoration  the  period  of 
reduction shall operate to postpone future increments and, if so, to what extent. 
(2)  If  a  Government  employee  is  reduced  as  a  measure  of  penalty to  a  lower 
service,  grade  or  post,  or  to  a  lower  time-scale,  the  authority  ordering  the  reduction 
may  or  may  not  specify  the  period  for  which  the  reduction  shall  be  effective;  but 
where the period is specified, that authority shall also state whether, on restoration, the 
period  of  reduction  shall  operate  to  postpone  future  increments,  and  if  so,  to  what 
extent. 
        Note  1.–Having regard to the principle underlying rule 4.12, the question as to whether 
an increment falling due during the period of reduction should or should not be allowed is one 
necessarily  to  be  decided  with  reference  to  the  exact  terms  of  the  order  of  the  punishing 
authority. If the Audit Officer feels any doubt about the intention underlying the orders of the 
punishing authority, he has simply to ascertain it and act accordingly. 
           Note  2.–If  the  reduction  to  a  lower  post  or  grade  is  for  an  unspecified  or  indefinite 
period, the pay of the Government employee, on re-appointment to the higher   post   or grade 
shall be regulated under the normal rules and not under rule 4.12. 
           Note  3.–(a) Every order passed by the  authority  imposing on a  Government employee 
the penalty of reduction to a lower stage in a time-scale should indicate – 
(i) the date from which it will take effect and the period (in term of years and months) 
for which the penalty shall be operative; 
(ii)  the stage  in  the  time-scale (in  terms of rupees)  to  which the  Government   
employee is reduced; and 
(iii) the extent (in terms of years and months), if any, to which the period referred to at  
(i) above should operate to postpone future increments. 
It  should  be  noted  that  reduction  to  a  lower  stage  in  a  time-scale  is  not  permissible 
under  the  rules  either  for  an unspecified  period  or  as  a  permanent  measure.    Also  when  a 
Government  employee  is  reduced  to  a  particular  stage,  his  pay  will  remain  constant  at  that 
stage for the entire period of reduction. The period to be specified under (iii) should in no case 
exceed the period specified under (i). 
(b) The question as to what should be the pay of a Government employee on the expiry 
of the period of reduction should be decided as follows:– 
 

53 
  [Chap.  IV]     PAY  [4.12-4.12A] 
           (i)  If, the order of reduction lays down that the period of reduction shall not operate to 
postpone  future  increments,  the  Government  employee  should  be  allowed  the  pay 
which he would have drawn in the normal course but for the reduction.  
(ii) If the order specifies that the period of reduction was to operate to postpone future 
increments  for  any  specified  period  the  pay  of  the  Government  employee  shall  be 
fixed  in  accordance  with  (i)  above  but  after  treating  the  period  for  which  the 
increments were to be postponed as not counting for increments.  
(c) In  order  to  ensure,  that  the  object  underlying  Rule 4.12(1) of not  allowing 
increments  during  the  period  of  reduction  is  achieved, every  order  passed  by  a 
competent authority imposing on a Government employee the penalty of reduction 
to  a  lower  stage  in  a  time  scale  should  invariably  specify  that  stage  in  terms  of 
rupees to which the Government employee is reduced as in the following form :– 
                      The  ______________has  directed  that  Shri  __________  should  be  reduced  to  a 
pay of  Rs._________ for a period of _________with effect from ________. 
         4.12-A.   Where   an   order   of   penalty   of   withholding   of   increment   of   a 
Government employee or his reduction to a lower service, grade or post, or to a lower 
time-scale, or to a lower stage in a time-scale, is set aside or modified by a competent 
authority   on   appeal   or   review,   the   pay   of   the   Government   employee   shall, 
notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  these  Rules,  be  regulated  in  the  following 
manner:– 
(a)  if the said order is set aside, he shall be given, for the period such order has 
been in force, the difference between the pay to which he would have been 
entitled had that order not been made and the pay he had actually drawn; 
(b)  if the said order is modified, the pay shall be regulated as if the order as so 
modified had been made in the first instance.         
         Explanation:–If  the  pay  drawn  by  a  Government employee  in  respect  of  any 
period  prior  to  the  issue    of  the  orders  of  the  competent  authority  under  this  rule  is 
revised,  the  leave  salary  and  allowances  (other  than  travelling  allowance),  if  any, 
admissible to him during that period shall be revised on the basis of the revised pay. 
          Note.–In  respect  of  cases  falling  under  clause  (a)  of  this  rule,  service  rendered  by  the 
Government employee in the lower service, grade or post or lower time-scale or lower stage in 
the time-scale or at the stage the increment was withheld, from the date of imposition of such 
penalty  by  the  disciplinary  authority  to  the  date  on  which  the  order of  penalty  is  set  aside  by 
the competent appellate or reviewing authority shall count for increment or for other purposes 
in  the  post  which  he  was  holding  immediately  before  the  imposition  of  the  penalty  provided 
that he would have continued to hold that post but for the order of penalty. In respect of cases 
falling  under  clause (b) of this rule, such service from the date of imposition of the penalty by  
 

54 
 [4.12A-4.13] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
the  disciplinary  authority  to  the  date  on  which  the  order  is  modified  by  the  appellate  or 
reviewing authority, shall be counted for the purpose of increment or for other purposes in the 
post which he was holding immediately before the imposition of the penalty or any other post 
which  he  would  have  held  but  for  the  order  of  penalty,  to  the  extent,  the  modified  order 
permits of such counting. For example, if an officer of a Group „A‟ Service in the higher scale 
of    pay  of  Rs.  15600-39100+5400 Grade Pay is reduced to a Group „B‟ Service in the pay 
scale  of  Rs.  10300-34800+4400  Grade  Pay,  for  a  period  of,  say,  two  years,  and  if  after  six 
months, the order is modified by the appellate authority as reduction to the Group „A‟ Service 
in the  lower scale  of Rs. 10300-34800+5000 Grade Pay, the  period of six  months shall count 
for  increment  in  the  lower  scale.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  order  of  penalty  is  modified  as 
reduction  to  a  lower  stage  in  the  time-scale  of  Rs.  15600-39100+5400  Grade  Pay,  for  a 
specified  period or withholding  of  increment  in  that  time-scale  for  a  specified  period,  the 
period  that  has  already  elapsed  since  the  date  of  imposition  of  the  original  penalty  shall  be 
taken into account only for the purpose of computing the specified period of penalty under the 
modified order. 
         Administrative Instruction.–A permanent   post   vacated   by   reduction   of   a 
Government  employee  to  a  lower  service,  grade  or  post  or  to  a  lower  time  scale, 
should not be filled substantively until the expiry of a period of one year from the date 
of such reduction. 
 Where on the expiry of the period of one year, the permanent post is filled and 
the original incumbent of the post is reinstated thereafter, he should be accommodated 
against any post which may be substantively vacant in the grade to which his previous 
substantive post belonged.  
 
          If   there  is   no   such   vacant   post,   he   should   be   accommodated   against   a 
supernumerary  post  which  should  be  created  in  this  grade  with  proper  sanction  and 
with the  stipulation  that  it  would  be  terminated  on  the  occurrence  of  the  first 
substantive vacancy in that grade. 
PAY OF OFFICIATING GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES 
         4.13. (1) Subject to the provisions of rules 4.22 to 4.24, a Government employee 
who is appointed to officiate in a post shall not draw pay higher than his substantive 
pay in respect of a permanent post, other than a tenure post, unless the post in which 
he is appointed to officiate is one enumerated in the schedule to this rule or unless the 
officiating  appointment  involves  the  assumption  of  duties  and  responsibilities  of 
greater importance than those attaching to the post, other than a tenure post on which 
he holds a lien:  
          Provided  that  the  competent  authority  may  exempt  from  the  operation  of  this 
rule, any service which is not organised on a time-scale basis and in which a system of 
acting promotions from grade to grade is in force at the time of the coming into force 
of these rules: 

55 
 [Chap.  IV]  PAY              [4.13] 
           Provided  further  that  the  competent  authority  may  specify  posts  outside  the 
ordinary line of a service the holders of which may, notwithstanding the provisions of 
this  rule and subject to such conditions as the competent authority may prescribe,  be 
given  any  officiating  promotion  in  the  cadre  of  the  service  which  the  authority 
competent to order promotion may decide and may thereupon be granted the same pay 
(whether with or without any special pay, if any, attached to such posts) as they would 
have received if still in the ordinary line. 
         (2) For the purpose of this rule, the officiating appointment shall not be deemed 
to involve the assumption of duties or responsibilities of greater importance if the post 
to  which  it  is  made  is  on  the  same  scale  of pay  as  the  permanent  post,  other  than  a 
tenure post, on which he holds a lien, or on a scale of pay identical therewith.  
          Note 1.–The words „duties‟ and „responsibilities‟ used in this rule are to be interpreted in 
a  wide  sense  as  including  besides  the  works  to  be  performed  the  general  responsibilities  and 
liabilities incidental to being member of a particular service.  See also note 7 below rule 4.4. 
          Note 2.–Omitted. 
          Note  3.–With reference to the 2nd proviso in clause (1) of this rule it has been decided 
not to issue a list of the posts of the kind referred to therein, but to deal, on its merits, with each 
case as it arises. In each case  so dealt with, adequate  safeguards should be laid down so as to 
prevent the tenure of posts outside the ordinary line of a service by unduly senior Government 
employees which might cause undue expense and be in other ways contrary to public interest 
and also to prevent Government employee from receiving the rate of pay attached to selection 
posts which they would have been regarded as unfit to hold if present in the ordinary line. This 
point  should  be  carefully  kept  in  view  by  the  authority  recommending  a  case  for  the 
declaration by the competent authority. 
                                                   Note 4.– (i) Punjab Government have sanctioned the adoption of the following guiding 
principles for purpose of clarifying the position and for the working of the convention usually 
known as the “next below rule”:– 
  (1)   A  Government  employee  out  of  his  regular  line  should  not  suffer  by  forfeiting 
officiating  promotion  which  he  would  otherwise  have  received,  had  he  remained 
in his regular line.  
  (2)   The fortuitous officiating promotion of some one junior to a Government employee 
who is out of the regular line does not in itself give rise to a claim under the next 
below rule. 
  (3)    Before such a claim is established, it should be necessary that all the Government 
employees senior to the Government employee who is out of the regular line have 
been given officiating promotion. 
(4)   It  is  also  necessary  that  the  Government  employee  next  below  him  should  have 
been  given  promotion,  unless  in  any  case  the  officiating  promotion  is  not  given 
because of inefficiency unsuitability or leave. 

56 
 [4.13] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
     (5)   In the event of one or more of the three bars mentioned above, of being applicable 
to the Government employee immediately below the Government employee outside 
his  regular  line,  the  same  Government  employee  even  more  junior  should  have 
received  officiating  promotion  and  the  Government  employees,  if  any, in  between 
that should have been passed over for one of these reasons. 
 (ii) The holders of special (interim) posts such as Secretaryship to a Governor or a State 
Government should be ready to accept loss of officiating promotion in a higher scale or grade 
to  higher  posts in  the  ordinary  line  for  short periods,  not  exceeding  three  months,  in 
consequence of their incumbency of special posts, and that when the stage is reached at which 
their retention involves loss of substantive or lengthy officiating promotions the proper course 
would be to make arrangements to enable them to be released from the special post rather than 
to compensate them for the loss of officiating promotion under the next below rule. 
 
           (iii) In cases where an officer is deprived of officiating promotion to a higher paid post 
owing to it being impracticable for the time being to release him from the special post outside 
the  ordinary  line  no  compensation  shall  be  granted  in respect  of  the  first  three  months  of  his 
retention in the lower paid post unless the conditions of the next below rule as satisfied. 
 
 (iv)  In  cases  where  the  period  for  which  officiating  promotion  is  lost  exceeds  three 
months  the  officer  concerned  may  be granted  the  pay  of  the  higher  paid  post  for  the  excess 
period  but  arrangements  should  be  made  wherever  possible  to  avoid  depriving  officers  of 
lengthy period of officiating promotions. 
 
 (v)  Save  in  exceptional  circumstances,  no  officer  to  whom  the  next  below  rule  would 
apply  should  be  retained  in  a  lower  paid  post  for  more  than  six  months  beyond  the  date  on 
which he becomes entitled to officiate continuously in a higher post. 
 
 (vi) The expression “posts outside the ordinary line of a service” in the second proviso 
to rule also includes, besides ex-cadre posts, special posts outside the ordinary line, which are 
borne on the cadre of a service.  Holders of such posts can be given the benefit of a declaration 
under  that  rule  provided  that  the  conditions  precedent  to  the  applicant  of  the  next  below  rule 
are fulfilled in their case. 
 
         (vii)  Cases  of  those  holders  of  posts  in  the  ordinary  line,  who  may  suffer  loss  of 
officiating promotion owing to it being impracticable to release them from their posts, can also 
be  dealt  with  under  the  second  proviso  to  rule  4.13  if  the  conditions  precedent  to  the 
application of the next below rule are satisfied in any case. 
 (viii) In the case of officers, who in the public interest have to be deprived of officiating 
promotions  whether  they  are  serving  outside  the  ordinary  line  or  in  the  ordinary  line  and  in 
which  case  the  conditions  laid  down  in  the  next  below  rule  are  not  satisfied,  the  instructions 
contained in clauses (iii) and (iv) above will apply. 
  (ix)  The  benefit  of  officiating  promotion  under  the next below  rule  should  be  allowed 
subject  to  the  fulfilment  of  the  conditions  only  against  promotions  in  a  cadre  in  vacancies        
of  more than 90  days  duration. In other  words,  the  initial  vacancy  as  well  as  subsequent  

57 
[Chap. IV]  PAY              [4.13] 
vacancies on the basis of which the benefit is to be continued should each be of more than 90 
days  duration.  The  benefit  should  not  be  allowed  in  respect  of  promotions  against  a  chain  of 
vacancies which taken together extend beyond 90 days. 
                    ORDERS OF THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT 
 In  some  instances  claims  have  been  supported  for  the  protection  of  more  than 
one officer in respect of a single officiating appointment in cases where a consecutive 
series of two or more officers in a cadre are on deputation to posts outside the regular 
line,  and  the  officer next  below  them  is  promoted  to officiate  in a  higher  post in  the 
cadre.  In  order  to  eliminate  any  doubt  in  the  matter,  it  has  been  decided  by 
Government that one officer and one officer only, namely, the  most senior fit officer 
who is not debarred by the conditions prescribed for the application of the rule should 
be allowed the benefit under the “next below” rule. 
 In may happen that the senior most officer serving outside the regular line does 
not  require  to be protected under the „next below‟ rule by his belonging to one or 
other of the types indicated below:– 
 (i) An officer serving outside the ordinary line holds a post carrying a scale of 
pay identical with that of an administrative post in the ordinary line, and is, 
by virtue of a declaration in terms of the exception below rule 4.13; eligible 
for the pay and incremental benefits of the higher post in the ordinary line. 
(ii)  An  officer  outside  the  regular  line  holds  a  post (generally  temporary) 
carrying better pay than the “identical” scale. 
   In  such  cases, the protection under the “next below” rule in respect of any 
one  vacancy  occurring  in  the  regular  line  may  go  to  the  next  senior  most  fit 
officer  of  the  series  serving  outside  the  cadre  who  is  not  independently 
protected in respect of pay increment or pension by belonging to one or other of 
these types. 
          Note  5.–In the case of ministerial and other establishment in which there are no grades 
the proviso in clause (1) of this rule is intended to cover, where necessary, all cases of the grant 
of officiating allowances from one fixed rate of pay to another without change of duty. 
           Note 6.– (i) It is not intended that the phrase “outside the ordinary line of service” in the 
second proviso to clause (1) of this rule should be rigidly interpreted either as “outside the 
cadre of a service” or as “outside the ordinary time-scale.” The form of words adopted in this 
rule  gives  discretion  to  the  competent  authority  in  regard  to  a  case  where  exceptional 
circumstances which could not be foreseen and provided for by rule, might arise.            
           (ii)  The  specification of a  post under this proviso  will enable  a  Government employee 
to count service in that post for increment in the grade in which he would have officiated, had 
he not been holding the specified post. 

58 
[4.13] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
           Note  7.–The  pay  of  a  Government  employee  officiating  in  a  post  the  pay  of  which  is 
subject to increase upon the passing of an examination or on the completion of a service is the 
pay which he would, from time to time, receive if he held the post substantively. 
           Note  8.–The pay of a Government employee officiating in a post the pay of which has 
been reduced from the next succession thereto is the reduced pay. 
           Note 9.–It is not the intention behind rule 4.14 under which the title to presumptive pay 
is  always  subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  rule  that  the  presumptive  pay  of  the  post  as 
determined by rule 4.4(a) (ii) be allowed as a  matter of course. According to rule 4.13, where 
the  officiating  appointment  does  not  involve  the  assumption  of  duties  and  responsibilities  of 
greater importance it is not permissible for the Government employee to draw pay higher than 
his  substantive  pay  (if  any)  in  respect  of  a  permanent  post.  In  other  words,  while  the  Punjab 
Civil Services   Rules   are   not   prohibitive   in   respect   of   officiating   promotions   in   such 
circumstances they, undoubtedly restrict the officiating pay to the substantive pay from time to 
time of the Government employee concerned. 
           The case of a Government employee without a permanent post and, therefore, having no 
substantive pay in respect of such a post, is however, different. Rule 4.13 being inapplicable in 
such cases, he  is entitled to have  his pay regulated exclusively  under rule  4.14 read with rule 
4.4 (b) but to check any extravagance in officiating pay in such cases, it is always open to the 
competent authority to take resort to the provisions of rule 4.16. 
           Note 10. Omitted. 
           Note  11.–A  declaration  by  Government  that  a  particular  post  involves  more important 
duties  or  duties  of  a  different  character  justifies  the  grant  of  officiating  pay  to  a  Government 
employee appointed to the post from another post in the same cadre. 
           Note 12.–Normally  no  pay  higher  than  the  substantive  pay  is  admissible on  an 
officiating appointment to a selection grade post which does not involve assumption of duties 
or  responsibilities  of  greater  importance  except  where  such  a  post  has  been  included  in  the 
Schedule  to  rule  4.13  of  Punjab  Civil  Services  Rules,  Volume  I, Part  I.    It  has  now  been 
decided in relaxation of the provisions of rule 4.13 ibid that – 
          (i)    officiating appointments to the Selection Grade may be permitted in such cases; 
         (ii)   the  pay  in  such  cases  may  be  fixed  in  the  Selection Grade  under  the  provisions  of 
rule 4.4 (a) (ii) of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part I, and that         
         (iii)   the benefit of the “Next Below Rule” may be extended in such cases, subject to all 
the conditions of that rule being satisfied. 
         (iv)  Pay  of  a  Government employee,  who on  the  date  of  his  placement  in  the  selection 
grade, was drawing pay, – 
    (i)   at the maximum of the ordinary scale; or 
       (ii)   at the maximum of the ordinary scale plus ex-gratia biennial increment, shall be  
                

59 
[Chap.  IV]  PAY     [4.13-4.14] 
regulated as follows, namely:– 
(a)   pay shall  be  fixed  at  the  next  stage  in  the  selection  grade  where  pay  at  the 
maximum of the ordinary scale plus ex-gratia biennial increment, as the case 
may be, has been drawn for one year or more than one year; 
(b)  period  of  service  amounting  to  less  than one  year  rendered  at  the  maximum 
of the ordinary scale or at the  maximum of the ordinary scale plus ex-gratia 
biennial increment, as the case may be, shall be  counted for the purposes of 
increment in the selection grade; and  
(c)   the  next  increment  in  the  selection  grade  shall  accrue  after  rendering  the 
requisite qualifying service in the selection grade. 
  SCHEDULE 
   District and Sessions Judge, Selection Grade 
          4.14. (1)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  Rules  4.13  and  4.16  a  Government 
employee who  is  appointed  to  officiate  in  a  post  shall  draw  the  presumptive  pay  of 
that post. 
          (2)  On  an  enhancement  in  the  substantive  pay,  as  a  result  of  increment  or 
otherwise, the pay of such Government employee shall be re-fixed under sub-rule (1) 
from the date of such enhancement as if he was appointed to officiate in that post on 
that date where such re-fixation is to his advantage. 
          Note 1.–See also notes 7 and 8 below rule 4.13. 
           Note  2.–In  the  case  of  a  Government  employee  whose  officiating  pay  on  refixation 
under clause (2) of this rule carries his pay above the efficiency bar stage in the time-scale of 
the   officiating   post,   the   Government   employee   concerned   should   be   deemed   to   have 
automatically  crossed  the  efficiency  bar  at  the  time  of  relaxation  of  officiating  pay  and  the 
question of application of efficiency bar shall not arise. In the case of a Government employee 
officiating  in  a  post  and  whose  pay  had  been  refixed  under  clause  (2) of  this  rule,  if  he  is 
confirmed  in  that  post  from  a  retrospective  date,  the  refixation  of  pay  done  under  clause  (2) 
above  after  the  date  of his  confirmation  will  have  to  be  revised  and  consequently  over 
payments, if any, should be recovered. 
           Note  3.–In  the  case  of  a  person  proceeding  on  leave,  if  the  period  of  leave  counts  for 
increment  in  the  officiating  post  under  rule  4.9  (b)  subject to  the  fulfilment  of  the  conditions 
and production  of  the  necessary  certificates,  his  officiating  pay  may  be re-fixed  under  rule 
4.14(2)  from  the  very  date  of  increment  or  increase  in  the  substantive  pay  as  if  he  was 
appointed to officiate in that post on that date. The benefit of the increase in officiating pay can 
be  had  by  him  only  from  the  date  of  resumption of  duties  but  his  next  increment  in  the 
officiating  post  will  accrue  to  him  from  an  earlier  date  in  the  next  year  calculated  with 
reference to the date of refixation of pay.            
           If, however, the period of leave does not count for increment, in the officiating post, the 
Government  employee  loses  all  connection  with  that  post during that period and he will be  

60 
[4.14-4.16] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
entitled to get  his  officiating pay fixed only from the date he returns from leave in which case 
the next increment will fall due only after completion of the prescribed period of duty from the 
date  of  resuming  charge  unless  he  becomes  entitled  to  refixation  of    pay  under  rule  4.14  (2) 
once again from an earlier date. 
           Note  4.–Where  the  increment  of  a  Government  employee  in  the  post  in  which  he  is 
officiating  has been  withheld  under rule  4.7  without any reference to the  increments  that  will 
accrue to him in the post held by him substantively, the provisions contained in sub-rule (2) of 
this  Rule  shall  not  apply  before  the  date  from  which  the  orders  withholding  the  increment 
finally cease to be operative. However, the Government employee may be allowed during the 
period  of  penalty  of  withholding  of  increment,  his  substantive  pay  from  time  to  time  if  the 
same happens to be more than the officiating pay. 
           These  provisions  shall  also  apply  in  respect  of  a  Government  employee  whose  pay  in 
the  post  held  by  him  in an  officiating  capacity  has  been  withheld  at  a  particular  stage  or  the 
efficiency bar stage of the time-scale   of   that   post   for   failure   to   pass   a departmental 
examination. 
           Note  5.–The  pay  of  the  Government  employee  who  was  not  actually  officiating  at  the 
time of enhancement of his substantive pay, but would have officiated under the „next below 
rule‟, but for his deputation  to  some  other  post/officiating  appointment  to  a  still  higher  post, 
shall  be  re-fixed  under  clause  (2)  above  notionally  in  the post  in  which  he  would  have 
continued  to  officiate  but  for  his  deputation  to  some  other  post/appointment  in  an  officiating 
capacity  to  a  still  higher  post.  As  and  when  the  Government  employee  reverts to  that  post, 
from deputation/higher post, the actual pay to be given to him on the date of reversion will be 
arrived at with reference to such notional pay. 
         4.15.  When  a  Government  employee  officiates  in  a  post,  the  pay  of  which  has 
been  fixed  at  a  rate  personal  to  another  Government  employee,  the competent 
authority may permit him to draw pay at any rate not exceeding the rate so fixed or, if 
the  rate  so  fixed  be  a  time-scale,  may  grant  him  initial  pay  not  exceeding  the  lowest 
stage  of  that  time-scale  and  future  increments  not  exceeding  those  of  the  sanctioned 
scale.      
           Note 1.–This rule prescribes the initial rate of pay only. If the pay personally fixed is on 
a  time-scale  it is not intended that  an officiating incumbent should be  debarred from drawing 
increments in that time-scale according to the ordinary rules. 
           Note 2.  Omitted. 
          4.16.  A  competent  authority  may  fix  the  pay  of  an  officiating  Government 
employee at an amount less than that admissible under these rules. 
           Note  1.–One  class  of  cases  falling under  this  rule  is  that  in  which  a  Government 
employee merely holds charge of the current duties and does not perform the full duties of the 
post. 
           Note  2.–When  a  Government  employee  is  appointed  to  officiate  in  a  post  on  a  time-
scale of pay but has his pay fixed below the minimum of the time-scale under this rule he must  

61 
[Chap. IV]            PAY     [4.16-4.21] 
not be  treated  as  having  effectually  officiated  in  that  post  within  the  meaning  of  rule  4.4  or 
having rendered duty in it within the meaning of rule 4.9. 
           Such a Government employee, on confirmation, should have his initial pay fixed under 
rule 4.4 (b) and draw the next increment after he has put in duty for the usual period required, 
calculated from the date of his confirmation.          
           Note  3.–The  power  conferred  by  this  rule  is  not  exercisable  save  by  a  special  order 
passed  in  an  individual  case  and  on  a  consideration  of  the  facts  of  that  case.  A  general  order 
purporting  to  oust  universally  the  operation  of  rule  4.14  would  be ultra  vires of  this  rule. 
Although, the  practice  of passing ostensibly  special order on every individual case  would not 
be ultra vires of this rule it would constitute the grossest possible fraud thereon. 
          4.17. A competent authority may issue general or special orders allowing acting 
promotions to be  made in the  place of Government employees who are treated as on 
duty under rule 2.16 (b). 
         Note.–Acting  promotions  have  been  permitted  under  this  rule  in  place  of  Government 
employees who are treated as on duty under item 1 (i), of the Schedule to Chapter II. 
                                           PERSONAL PAY 
         4.18. Except when  the  authority  sanctioning  it  orders  otherwise,  personal  pay 
shall be reduced by any amount by which the recipient‟s pay may be increased,  shall 
cease as soon as his pay is increased by an amount equal to his personal pay. 
         4.19. Omitted. 
PAY OF TEMPORARY POSTS 
         4.20. When a temporary post is created which may have to be filled by a person 
not already in Government service, the pay of the post shall be fixed with reference to 
the  minimum that  is  necessary  to  secure  the  services  of  a  person  capable  of 
discharging efficiently the duties of the post. 
         4.21. When a temporary post is created which will probably be filled by a person 
who  is  already  a  Government  employee,  its  pay  shall  be fixed  by  the  competent 
authority with due regard to – 
 (a)  the character and responsibility of the work to be performed; and 
  (b)  the existing pay of Government employees of a status sufficient to warrant 
their selection for the post. 
        Note 1.–Under these rules, special duty or deputation in India will not be recognised.  A 
temporary  post  will  be  created  for  the  performance  of  that  duty.    If  the  special  duty  is  to  be 
undertaken in addition to the ordinary duties of the Government employee then rules 4.20 and 
4.22 will apply. 
          Note 2. Omitted. 

62 
[4.21-4.24] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IV] 
          Note  3.–(1) Temporary posts  may be  divided into two categories,  viz., posts created to 
perform  the  ordinary  work for  which  permanent  posts  already  exist  in  a  cadre,  the  only 
distinction  being  that  the  new  posts  are  temporary  and  not  permanent,  and  isolated  posts 
created  for  the  performance  of  special  tasks  unconnected  with  the  ordinary  work  which  a 
service  is called upon to perform.  An example  of the  latter type  of post  would be  a  post on a 
Commission  of  enquiry.  A  distinction  by  strict  verbal  definition  is  difficult,  but  in  practice 
there should be little difficulty in applying the distinction in individual cases. The former class 
of posts should be considered to be a temporary addition to the cadre of a service whoever may 
be  the  individual  appointed  to  the  post;  while  the  latter  class  of  temporary  posts  should  be 
considered as unclassified and isolated ex-cadre posts. 
          (2) Temporary posts which by this criterion should be considered as temporary additions 
to the  cadre  of a  service  should be  created in the  time-scale  of the  service, ordinarily  without 
extra  remuneration.  Incumbents  of  these  posts  will,  therefore,  draw  their  ordinary  time-scale 
pays.    If  the  posts  involved  decided  increases  in  work  and  responsibility  in  comparison  with 
the duties of the parent cadre generally, it may be necessary to sanction special pay in addition. 
Such special pay may only be allowed with the approval of the competent authority.  
         (3) For isolated ex-cadre posts, it may occasionally be desirable to fix consolidated rates 
of  pay.  Where,  however,  the  post  is  to  be  held  by  members  of  a  service,  it  will  ordinarily  be 
preferable  to create  the  post in time-scale of  the holder‟s service. The  observations contained 
in paragraph 2 above will apply with equal force to the grant of special pay over and above the 
ordinary time-scale. 
COMBINATION OF APPOINTMENTS 
         4.22. The  competent authority  may  appoint  one  Government  employee  to  hold 
substantively,  as  a  temporary  measure or  to  officiate  in,  two  or  more  independent 
posts at one time. In such cases, the Government employee shall draw the highest pay 
to which he would be entitled if his appointment to one of the posts stood alone: 
         Provided that the employee must fulfil the requisite qualifications and conditions 
for services for both the posts.          
         4.23. When a Government employee holds charge of the current duties of a post 
after  being  relieved  of those  of  his  substantive  post,  he  officiates in  that  post.  If  it  is 
not considered that he is entitled to the full officiating pay of the post, his pay may be 
fixed under rule 4.16. This should be done whenever the Government employee is not 
carrying out the full duties of the post. 
         Note.  Omitted.         
         4.24. When a  Government employee holds current duty charge  of another post, 
in addition to that of his own substantive post, he does not officiate in the former post 
and as such is not entitled to any additional remuneration.   

63 
 CHAPTER V  
  ADDITIONS TO PAY 
   I–COMPENSATORY ALLOWANCES 
General 
          5.1.  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  rules 5.2 to  5.8 and  to  the  conditions  that  the 
amount of compensatory allowance is so regulated that it is not on the whole a source 
of  profit  to  the  recipient,  a  competent  authority  may  grant  such  an  allowance  to  any 
Government employee. 
Unless in this section it be in any case otherwise expressly provided and subject 
to  the  provisions  of  rule  4.22 a  compensatory  allowance  attached  to  a  post  will  be 
drawn in full by the Government employee actually performing the duties of that post 
and  will  not  be  drawn  in  whole  or  in  part  by  anyone  else.    Save  as  provided  by  the 
rules in this part, a compensatory allowance attached to a post will cease to be drawn 
by a Government employee when he vacates the post. 
           Note  1.–Compensatory allowances to the personal staff of the Governor (including the 
Military Officers, if any), are regulated by the States Reorganisation (Governor‟s Allowances 
and Privileges) Order, 1957. 
          Note 2. –The grant of  T.A. (which is also a compensatory allowance, vide rule 2.13) is 
regulated by the rules in Volume III of these rules. 
          5.2. In this section – 
        (a)   „Leave‟ means total leave of all kinds, including extra ordinary leave, 
for   a period   not   exceeding   180   days and   leave   preparatory   to 
retirement  not    exceeding 300  days, but  does  not  include  terminal 
leave. 
            The title to compensatory allowance will remain intact– 
(i) when  the  original  leave  not  exceeding 180  days  is  not  subsequently 
extended,   or   if   extended,   the   total   does   not   exceed 180   days, 
throughout the period; 
(ii) when  the  original  or  extended  leave  not  exceeding 180  days,  referred 
to  in  sub-clause  (i)  is  subsequently  extended  and  the  total  period 
exceeds 180 days–up to the  date  of expiry of the original or extended 
leave  not  exceeding 180  days  or  the  date  of  sanction  to  the  first 
subsequent extension which causes the total period of leave to exceed 
180 days, whichever is earlier. 

64 
[5.2-5.3] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
 (b)   „Temporary  Transfer‟  means  a  transfer  to  duty  in  another  station  which  is 
expressed to be for a period not exceeding 90 days. For the purpose of this 
section  it  includes  deputation.  Subject  to  the  limit  of  90  days, the  title  to 
compensatory  allowance,  if  the  temporary  duty  is  subsequently  extended 
beyond  90  days  in  all,  will  remain  intact  upto  the  date  of  the  orders  of 
extension. 
Note  1.–Unless  in  any  case  it  be  otherwise  expressly  provided  in  these  rules,  joining 
time may be added to the period of 90 days provided in this rule. 
Note 2.–When vacation is combined with leave, the entire period of vacation and leave 
should be taken as one spell of leave for the purpose of clause (a) of this rule. 
Note 3.–Omitted. 
           Compensatory allowances, other than a house-rent allowance.  
5.3.  An  allowance  granted  owing  to  the  expensiveness  of  living,  other  than  a 
house-rent allowance, may be drawn– 
(a)  during „leave‟ at the same rate at which the employee was drawing before 
proceeding  on  leave  without  the production  of  a  certificate  prescribed  in 
sub-clause (ii) ; 
(aa)  during leave exceeding 180 days, but not exceeding 240 days– 
(i) in  case  the  employee  suffers  from  T.B.,  Cancer  or  other ailments  and 
furnishes a  medical  certificate  in  the  form  prescribed  under  rule 8.13. 
The  question  whether  the  allowance  may  be  paid  to  an  employee 
suffering from T.B., Cancer or other ailments during leave, on medical 
certificate  exceeding 240 days  will  be  decided  on  merit  by  the 
Administrative   Department   concerned   in consultation   with   the 
Department of Finance ; and 
(ii)   in case the employee certifies that he or his family or both resided for 
the period for which allowance is claimed at the station from which he 
proceeded  on  leave  or  at  another  station  he  will  be  entitled  to  similar 
allowance. 
Where  an  employee  does  not  join  duty  after  the  expiry  of  leave,  whether  on 
medical  grounds  or  otherwise  and  resigns,  he  shall  not  be  eligible  for  the  allowance 
for  the  entire  period  of  such  leave  and  the  allowance  sanctioned  earlier  will  be 
recovered  before  the  resignation  is accepted : Provided  that  in  case  of  an  employee 
who is  granted leave but does not join duty after expiry of such leave,  owing to death 
 

65 
[Chap.  V]   ADDITIONS TO PAY         [5.3-5.5] 
or invalidity during such leave,  the  recovery of allowance  sanctioned  earlier will not 
be effected. 
           Note  1.–The  provisions  of  this  clause  do  not  apply  to  the  case  of  industrial  or  other 
employees  whose  leave  terms  are  governed  by  special  orders  and  not  by the Revised Leave 
Rules.  In  such  cases,  the  compensatory  allowance  should  be  granted  only  during  holidays  or 
leave  with  pay.  For  this  purpose,  a  weekly  holiday,  where  admissible,  will  be  treated  as  a 
holiday with pay except when it forms a part of spell of leave  without pay or holiday without 
pay. 
           Note 2. Omitted. 
(b)   during temporary transfer, if – 
 (i) the  authority  sanctioning  the  transfer  certifies  that  the  Government 
employee is likely on the expiry of the temporary duty to return to the 
station from which he is transferred ; 
  (ii)   the Government employee draws no allowance of the same kind in the  
post to which he is transferred ; and 
(iii)  the  Government  employee  certifies  that  he  kept  his  family,  for  the 
period for which the allowance is claimed, at the station from which he 
proceeded on transfer. 
5.4. Omitted. 
                               HOUSE RENT ALLOWANCE 
          5.5. (1)  A  house  rent  allowance  may  be  drawn  by  a  Government  employee 
during leave or transfer in the circumstances specified in clause (a) or (b) of rule 5.3.   
 (2) The eligibility for the grant of the House Rent Allowance to a Government 
employee, shall be determined with reference to his place of posting. 
 (3)  A  Government  employee  shall,  ordinarily,  be  required  to  reside  within  a 
radius  of  twenty-five  kilometres  from  the  headquarters.  However,  a  competent 
authority may permit a Government employee to reside at a place beyond twenty-five 
kilometres from the headquarters:  
 Provided  that  the Government employee  attends  to  his  duties  punctually  and 
without detriment to his efficiency. 
(4) Where  a  Government  employee  entitled  to  rent-free  accommodation  under 
rule  5.35,  is  not  provided  with  such  accommodation,  he shall be  entitled  to  draw  an 
additional house rent allowance at the rate of five percent of his emoluments subject to   

66 
[5.5-5.6] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
the condition that he resides in a rented house within a radius of three kilometres from 
the place of duty. 
   Clarification: The  house-rent  allowance  being  a  compensatory  allowance  may 
be  allowed  to  be  drawn  by  a  Government  employee  under  suspension  like  other 
compensatory  allowances,  subject  to  the  conditions laid  down  in  rule  7.2  (b),  being 
satisfied. In the case of an employee whose period of suspension is treated as having 
been  spent  on  leave,  the  grant  of  house-rent  allowance  will  be  regulated  under  the 
relevant provisions of rules 5.3 to 5.9 as in the case of other compensatory allowances. 
   Note  1.–The  competent  authority  to  permit  residence  of  a  Government  employee 
beyond twenty-five  kilometers of his headquarters, shall be the  same as defined in the entries 
against Serial No. 2 of the Table below rule 15.1. 
Note  2.–A  Government  employee  who,  on  transfer,  has  been  permitted  to  retain 
Government  accommodation  at  the  old  station  will  be  eligible  for  house-rent  allowance,  in 
respect  of  the  new  station,  if  otherwise  admissible,  without  regard  to  the  fact  whether  he  has 
been permitted to retain the Government accommodation at old station on payment of normal 
rent or penal rent. 
 Note 3.–The  word “emoluments”, in  this  rule  has  the  same  meaning  as  defined  in rule 
5.33.                                  
      CONVEYANCE ALLOWANCE 
5.6. An  allowance  granted  on  condition  that  a conveyance is  maintained,  may 
be drawn during leave, if – 
(i)  the authority sanctioning the leave certifies that the Government employee 
is  likely,  on  the  expiry  of  the  leave,  to  return  to  the post  from  which  he 
proceeds on leave, or to be appointed to a post in which the possession of 
the conveyance will  be  advantageous  from  the  point  of  view  of  his 
efficiency; and  
(ii) the  Government  employee  certifies  that  he  continued  to  maintain  the 
conveyance and that he spent the amount claimed on its upkeep during the 
period for which the claim is submitted, 
For  periods  of  temporary  duty,  it  can  only  be  drawn  with  the  sanction  of 
competent authority. 
           Note 1.–See note 1 below rule 5.3. 
           Notes 2, 3 and 4 Omitted. 
           Note  5.–When  a  conveyance allowance  of  a  Government  employee  has  been  reduced 
during  leave  by  the  competent  authority  under  this  rule  and  the  Government  employee  is 
transferred immediately  on  the  expiry  of  leave to  another post carrying a similar  allowance  

67 
[Chap.  V]   ADDITIONS TO PAY         [5.6-5.9] 
then during joining time the allowance shall be granted at the rate at which it was drawn during 
leave. 
 5.7.   A conveyance allowance to   which   the   obligation   of   maintaining   a 
conveyance is not attached is not admissible during leave or temporary transfer. 
OTHER COMPENSATORY ALLOWANCES 
5.8.  A  compensatory  allowance  other  than  an  allowance  for  the  regulation  of 
which provision is made in any of the rules 5.3 to 5.7 may be drawn during leave or 
temporary transfer if – 
(a)  the authority sanctioning the leave or transfer certifies that the Government 
employee is likely on the expiry of the leave or temporary transfer, to return 
to the post to which the allowance is attached or to another post carrying a 
similar allowance; and  
(b)  the  Government  employee  certifies  that  he  continued,  for  the  period  for 
which the allowance is claimed, to incur the whole or a considerable part of 
the expenditure for which the allowance was granted. 
    Note 1.–See note 1 below rule 5.3. 
   Note  2.–With reference to clause (b) of this rule, a Government employee, who desires 
to  avail  himself  of  the  benefit  of  the  rule,  should  submit  his  claim  with  a  statement  of the 
relevant expenses to the authority sanctioning the leave or transfer.  That authority should then 
decide, having regard to the provisions of rule 5.1 and 5.2 how much of the allowance should 
be  drawn  and  communicate  his  decision  to  the  Accountant-General  with  a  copy  of  the 
statement of expenses referred to above. The copy of the statement of expenses may be sent to 
the  Accountant-General, in a  confidential cover, if this is considered desirable. It will then be 
open to the Accountant-General, either to accept the decisions or to challenge such of them as 
reveal   any   manifest   breach   of   the   canons   of   financial   propriety.–vide   P.F.R.   2.10.The 
provisions of this rule  do not apply to Government employees in receipt of the  compensatory 
local allowance sanctioned for Amritsar in whose case the  provisions of clause (b) of the rule 
will  be  applicable.  In  regard  to  the  drawal  of  similar  and  other  hill  compensatory  allowances 
during leave, it will suffice if it is certified by the Government employee concerned that he or 
his family or both resided at the hill station concerned for the period for which the allowance is 
claimed. 
              COMPENSATORY ALLOWANCE DURING JOINING TIME 
   5.9. A Government employee on joining time under rule 9.1 (b), if he is entitled 
to tentage while holding his old post and tentage is also attached to his new post, may 
draw tentage during joining time at the lower of the two rates. 
 

68 
[5.9-5.15] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
If the  Government employee in his old post drew a  compensatory allowance granted 
on  account  of  special  expensiveness  of  living  and  the  transfer  is  to  another  post 
carrying a similar allowance, he may draw the compensatory allowance during joining 
time  under clauses  (a) and (b) of rule 9.1: Provided that if the  rates  differ in the two 
posts, he may draw the lower rate only. 
   5.10 to 5.12.  Omitted. 
    II – RENT OF GOVERNMENT RESIDENCES 
GENERAL 
   5.13.  The  following  rules  govern  the  allotment  to  Government  employees  for 
use by them as residences of such buildings owned or leased by Government or such 
portions thereof as may be made available for the purpose. 
           Note.–When   a   Government   employee   of   a   government,   other   than   the   Punjab 
Government, occupies by official arrangement a residence provided by the Punjab Government 
or vice versa, rent shall be recoverable from the Government employee in accordance with the 
rules in Appendix 4 to the Punjab Financial Rules.  
   5.14. Nothing contained in these rules shall so operate as to require payment of 
rent, for the occupation of residences supplied by Government, by those Government 
employees  who have been exempted from such payment under the provisions  of law 
or to affect the amount of rent or charges payable by those Government employees in 
whose case the amount so payable is prescribed by law for the time being in force. 
Capital Cost of Buildings and Assessment of rents 
(i) Capital Cost of a Residence. 
5.15.  For  the  purpose  of  the  assessment  of rent,  the  capital cost  of a  residence 
owned  by  Government  shall  include  the  cost  or  value  of  sanitary,  water-supply  and 
electric  installations  and  fittings,  but  exclude  the  cost  or  value  of  the  site  (including 
expenditure on its preparation); and shall be either – 
(a)  the cost   of   acquiring   or   constructing   the   residence   and   any   capital 
expenditure  incurred  after  acquisition  or  construction;  or  when  this  is  not 
known, 
(b)  the present value of the residence: 
           Provided  that,  where  it is  so  directed  by  general  or special  order, the  value  of 
the site and the cost of its preparation shall be included in the capital cost, and the cost 
of  sanitary,  water-supply  and  electric  installations  may  be  excluded.  If  the  cost  of 
sanitary, water-supply and electric installations is ordered to be excluded rent for such 
installations shall be levied at the rates specified under rule 5.23 (d).  

69 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY     [5.15-5.18] 
           Note 1.– For cases in  which the  above  proviso  will  apply, see paragraph 3.27, Punjab 
Public Works Department Code, 2nd Edition. 
           Note  2.–The  cost  of  restoration  or  special  repairs  shall  not  be  added  to  capital  cost  or 
present value unless such restoration or repairs add to accommodation or involve replacement 
of the existing type of work by work of a more expensive character. 
   5.16. For the purpose of rule 5.15– 
(i)   expenditure incurred on works such as– 
(a)  raising, levelling and dressing sites; 
(b)  construction  of  revetments  and  retaining  walls,  unless  when  incurred 
in connection with the provision of a tennis court; 
(c)  storm-water drains; and 
(d)  boundary pillars; 
shall be considered as expenditure on preparation of a site; and 
(ii)  expenditure incurred on works such as – 
(a)  compound walls, fences and gates; 
(b)  approach roads, culverts and paths within the compound; 
shall be included in the capital cost of the residence for the purpose of assessment of 
standard rent. 
   5.17. When the present value of a residence and of the site on which it stands is 
unknown,–vide clause (b) of rule 5.15, the value of the residence and of the site shall 
be estimated separately by the Divisional Officer, who shall, if the estimated value of 
either  does  not  exceed an  amount  to  be  specified  by  the  Government, submit  the 
estimate to the Superintending Engineer who shall determine the present value.  If the 
Divisional Officer‟s estimate of either the site or the residence exceeds the amount so 
specified, he  shall  submit  it  to  the  Superintending  Engineer,  who  shall  forward  it  to 
the Chief Engineer, who shall determine the value of the residence and of the site. The 
Divisional  Officer‟s estimate  shall,  in  both  cases  be  accompanied  by a  report  of  the 
Chief Civil Officer of the district in regard to the value of the land and also the value 
of the building with reference to the market value of similar building in the vicinity. 
   5.18.  A  competent  authority  may,  for  reasons  which  should be  recorded, 
authorise  a  revaluation  of  all  residences  of  a  specified  class  or  classes  within  a 
specified area to be conducted under rule 5.17 above, and may revise the capital cost 
of any or all such residences on the basis of such revaluation. 

70 
[5.18-5.22]   THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
   Note.–The  intention of this  rule  is to authorise revaluation of a  residence or residences 
in  accordance  with  rule  5.17  even  when  the  factors  specified  in  clause  (a)  of  rule  5.15  are 
known. 
   5.19.  The  capital  cost,  howsoever  calculated,  shall  not  take  into  consideration 
(1)  any  charges  on  account  of  establishment  and  tools  and  plant,  other  than  such  as 
were  actually  charged  direct  to  the  work  in  cases  in  which  the  residence  was 
constructed by  Government,  or  (2)  in  other  cases,  the  estimated  amount  of  such 
charges. 
   Note.–Full departmental charges should be levied in cases referred to in note (1) below 
rule 5.15.  
  5.20.  Renewals  of  a  building  or  of  its  subsidiary  works,  such  as out-houses, 
roads, drains,  culverts,  etc., or new construction such as retaining walls,  necessitated 
by the occurrence of fire, flood, earthquake, abnormal storm or other calamity will be 
chargeable  to  the  capital  cost,  but  on  completion  a  competent  authority  will  decide 
what  amount  should  be  written  off  the  original  capital  cost.  When  a  portion  of  a 
building  required  to  be  dismantled  to  make  room  for  alterations  and  additions,  the 
capital  value  of  the  dismantled  portion  should  be  dealt  with  under  the  rules  in  the 
Public Works Department Code applying to buildings generally. 
 
  5.21.  A  competent  authority  may,  for  reasons  which  should  be  recorded,  write 
off a specified portion of the capital cost of a residence – 
(1)  When  a  portion  of  the  residence  must  be set  aside,  by  the  Government 
employee to whom the residence is allotted, for the reception of official and 
non-official visitors visiting him on business; or 
(2)  When  it  is  satisfied  that  the  capital  cost,  as  determined  under  the  above 
rules, would be greatly in excess of the proper value of the accommodation 
provided. 
           Note.–See also rule 5.39. 
   5.22.  In  assessing  the  cost  or  value  of  the  sanitary,  water  supply  and 
electric  installations and  fittings  (vide  rule  5.15), the  following  shall  be 
regarded as comprising the installations and fittings: – 
Electric Supply 
(1)    Wiring,  including  the  supply  line  from  the  main  and  all  connected     
apparatus such as fuse boxes and switches. 
(2)     Fixed   lamps   (bracket   and   pendant)   including   shades, holders   but 
excluding shades and bulbs. 

71 
  [Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY     [5.22-5.23] 
          (3)   Walls plugs of table lamps, table fans, and electric and water heaters. 
  (4)    Fan points (excluding ceiling fans and regulators). 
          (5)    Lightning interceptors. 
          (6)    Metres when supplied by Government. 
           Sanitary and water-supply 
          (1)    Pipe, including service pipe from the main; 
(2)    Apparatus for hot water supply; 
(3)    Cistern, taps and other necessary equipment; 
(4)    Baths, basins, and lavatory fittings; 
(5)    Metres when provided at the cost of Government; 
  (6)    Drains, including the main connection with the sewer; and all connected   
           apparatus such as gulleys, channels, traps and vent pipe for the disposal of    
           house wastes and sewage. 
            Note 1.–The  inclusion  of  these  articles  in  this  rule  does  not  bind  Government  to 
provide all or any of them in a residence. 
            Note 2.–When table lamps, table fans or other electrical appliances not included under 
“Electric Supply” above, have already been supplied, the cost should be included in the capital 
cost  of  the  residence,  but  on  their  becoming  unserviceable  they  should  not  be  replaced,  the 
capital cost of the residence being reduced accordingly. 
   (ii)  Standard Rent 
   5.23.  The standard rent of a residence shall be calculated as follows:– 
(a)    In the case of leased residences the standard rent shall be the sum paid to 
the  lessor plus an  allowance  for  meeting  during  the  period  of  lease  the 
probable cost of charges for – 
(i) both ordinary and special maintenance and repairs of the residence as 
may be a charge on Government including maintenance and repairs of 
any additional work done at Government expense; 
(ii)  capital expenditure on additions and alternations as may be  a charge  
on Government; 
                   (iii)  interest on capital expenditure referred to in (ii) above; and 
       (iv) the  rates  or  taxes  in  the  nature  of  house  or  property  tax,  if  any,   
payable  under  any  law  or  custom  by  the  owner  to  a  municipality  or 
other local body (but not recoverable from the Government employee 
to whom the residence is allotted). 
 

72 
[5.23]            THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
The  allowances  for  meeting  such  capital  expenditure  on  additions  and 
alterations  as  may  be  a  charge  on  Government  and  the  interest  and 
depreciation  in  connection  therewith,  shall  be  as  laid  down  in  paragraph 
3.22 (3) of the Punjab Public Works Department Code (Second Edition). 
  (b)  In the case of residence owned by Government the  standard rent shall be 
calculated on the capital cost of the residence, and shall be either – 
       (i) a percentage of such capital cost equal to such rate of interest as 
may from time to time be fixed by competent authority plus an 
addition for municipal and other taxes in the nature of house or 
property  tax  in  respect  of  the  residence  payable  by  Government  and 
for both  ordinary  and  special  maintenance  and  repairs,  such  addition 
being determined under rule 5.28; or 
       (ii)  Seven  and  half per cent per annum of such  capital cost, whichever is 
less.  The restriction of seven and a half per cent per annum shall not 
apply in the case of residences the capital cost of which is calculated 
under the proviso to rule 5.15. 
           (c) In both cases mentioned in clauses (a) and (b) above standard rent shall be 
expressed  as  standard  for  a  calendar  month  and  shall  be  equal  to  one-twelfth  of  the 
annual  rent  as  calculated  above  subject  to  the  proviso  that,  in  special  localities  or  in 
respect of special classes of residences, a competent authority may fix a standard rent 
to  cover  a  period  greater  than  one  month,  but not  greater  than  one  year.  Where  a 
competent authority takes action under this proviso standard rent so fixed shall not be 
a  larger  proportion  of  the  annual  rent  than  the  proportion  which  the  period  of 
occupation as prescribed under rule 5.48 below bears to one year. 
(d) When sanitary, water-supply and electric installations as defined in rule 5.22 
are  not  included  in  the  capital  cost  of  residence  rent  shall  be  assessed  on  the  capital 
value of such installations at the following percentages: – 
 
Interest Maintenance Depreciation 
Sanitary Installations  
 
   As per    
   sub-rule  
   (b)(ii) of                   
   this rule.        
6½ percent 
(ordinary 5 per 
cent and special 
1½ per cent) 
  
  ....     
Water Supply installations   
 
Electric Installations Ditto 4 percent 5 percent 
         Note 1.–Municipal taxes which by local rule or custom are levied on the occupant will 
be payable by the occupant in addition to the rent payable to Government under these rules. 
 

73 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY     [5.23-5.24] 
    Note 2.─ See also rule 5.40 infra. 
    Note  3.─For the  purpose  of clauses (a) and (b) above, the  additions for both ordinary 
and special maintenance and repairs shall not include anything for the establishment and tools 
and  plant charges,  except  to  the  extent  allowed  under  rule  5.19,  above.  Full  departmental 
charges should, however, be levied in cases referred to in note (1) below rule 5.15. 
    5.24.  (a)  When  the  standard  rent  of  a  residence  has  been  calculated,  minor 
additions  and  alterations  may  be  made  without  the  rent  of  the  residence  being 
increased subject to the following conditions:– 
          (i)  the total cost of such additions and alterations shall not exceed 5 per cent of 
the capital cost on which the standard rent was last calculated ; and 
         (ii)  such  additions  and alterations  shall be  made within five  years  after the last  
calculation on the standard rent. 
 (b) When by reasons of additions and alterations, the capital cost of a residence 
exceeds  by more  than  5 per cent the  capital cost on which  the  standard rent was  last 
calculated, the standard rent shall be recalculated with effect from the 1
st
 of April, next 
following or from the date upon which a new tenant becomes liable for the payment of 
rent whichever is earlier. 
          (c) Subject to the provisions of clause (b) the standard rent of a residence shall 
be  recalculated  on  the  expiry  of  five  years  from  the  date  of  last  calculations  and  the 
recalculations shall take effect from the 1
st
 of April next following or from such other 
date as the competent authority may direct. 
 (d)  When  the  portion  of  a  capital  cost  of  a  residence  is  written  off  under  the 
orders of a competent authority the rent should be recalculated forthwith. 
          Note  1.– It  is  the  duty of  the  Executive  Engineer  to  give  timely  notice  to  the  tenant 
concerned  of  the  increase  in  rent.  Omission,  however,  on  his  part  to  give  such  intimation  in 
any case will not constitute a reason for the enhancement of rent taking effect from a date later 
than that on which it is due under the above rule. 
    Note  2.–In  the  case  of  substantial  additions  or  alterations  to  a  residential  building, 
pending  sanction  of  the  revised  standard  rent  by  the  competent  authority,  its  rent  should  be 
provisionally fixed so as to allow an adequate margin to cover rent in respect of the estimated 
expenditure of such additions or alterations and unforeseen charges, and recovery of rent from 
the  tenant  should  be  effected  at  that  rate.  If  the  provisional  rent  is  more  than  the  revised 
standard rent, the amount recovered in excess shall be refunded to the tenant. 
    Note  3.–The  rental  value, viz.  Standard-Rent,  Market-Rent  and  Economic-Rent  of  the 
Government owned property (Buildings etc.) and those of Government employees who live in 
their self-owned houses or houses owned by their parents or children and are claiming House- 

74 
[5.24-5.27]           THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. V] 
Rent-Allowance therefor may be re-assessed after an interval of every 5 years.  If an employee  
becomes  entitled  to  claim  higher  rent  of  his  property and  consequential gain in House-
Rent Allowance as a result of the general appreciation in the market value of properties or due 
to inflation; he  will also draw proportionately less House-Rent,  resulting thereby in reduction 
of House-Rent-Allowance, should there be a depression in the general market due to economic 
or other causes. 
   5.25.  If  a  building  is  actually  occupied prior  to  the  closing  of  the  accounts  of 
expenditure   on   its   construction,   acquisition   or   equipment,   rent   is   nevertheless 
chargeable  from  the  date  of  occupation  and  should  be  fixed  provisionally  with  the 
sanction  of  the  competent  authority. The  rent,  thus  fixed  provisionally  while  the 
accounts are open, is subject to revision with retrospective effect when they are closed 
and  no  remission  of  rent  on  this  account  can  be  made  save  with  the  sanction  of  the 
competent authority. 
   Note.–The  provisions  of  note  2  below  rule  5.24  also  apply mutatis  mutandis to  newly 
constructed buildings.   
    5.26.   Omitted. 
   5.27. The average  annual  cost  of  maintenance  and  repairs  will  consist  of  two 
parts-special and ordinary charges as explained below: – 
 (i) Special charges will be those incurred in the renewal of floors of roofs or on 
other special repairs or replacements occurring at long intervals. Provisions 
for such  charges  should  be  made  in the  form  of  percentages  on  the  capital 
cost of  each  building.   These  percentages will  vary  for  different  classes  of 
buildings  and  are  laid down in rule  5.28. When  repairs  are  necessitated  by 
the occurrence of fire, flood, earthquake, abnormal storm or other calamity, 
the  cost  of  such  special  repairs  should  be  shown  separately  in  the  Capital 
and  the  Revenue  Accounts  under  Revenue  Charges  during  the  year,  and 
should not be included in the total charges or taken into account as a basis 
for the revision of the rent. 
(ii)  Ordinary  charges  will  include  the  cost  of  ordinary  annual  repairs  together 
with   a   proportional   share   of   the   expenditure   that   may   be   required 
quardrennially  or  at  other  short  intervals.  The  amount  of  these  charges  as 
regards  buildings  constructed  or  acquired  by  the  Irrigation  Branch  is 
estimated as laid down in rule 5.28.  For buildings  constructed or acquired 
by the Buildings and Roads Branch these will be estimated within the limits 
laid  down  in  rule  5.28  by  the  Executive  Engineer  of  the  Division  and 
approved by the Superintending Engineer. 
Note.– See also rule 5.20.   

75 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY           [5.28] 
   5.28. The following percentages of cost will be assessed on account of ordinary 
and special repairs in calculating the standard rent under rule 5.23 (b) (i) :– 
   (1)  When  acquired  or  constructed  through  the  agency  of  the  Public  Works 
Department, Irrigation Branch– 
 
Class of  
buildings 
  
 
Description 
  
 
Assessable   percentage   on   the 
Capital   cost   of   the   Building 
Excluding value of site 
Special repair. Ordinary 
repairs. 
A Those  in  good  order  built  by  the 
Works    Department    in    a    semi-
permanent   style,   i.e.   with   pucca 
foundation    Kutcha-pucca    outside 
walls,  lime  pointed  pucca  parapets 
and  chimneys  terraced  jack  arch  or 
wooden    karri    roofs    over    steel 
girders. 
½ 1½ 
B Those    of    a    similar    style    of 
construction    but    not    in    good 
condition  either  built  by  the  Public 
Works   Department   or   purchased 
from  private  individuals  and  added 
to and altered after purchase. 
¾ 2 
C 
 
 
 
Temporary buildings i.e. those with 
walls  of  mud masonary  with  a  roof 
of thatch or tiles or wooden karries. 
 
           1 
 
 
 
 
 

76 
[5.28-5.29] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. V] 
   (2)  When  acquired  or  constructed  through  the  agency  of  the  Public  Works 
Department, Buildings and Roads Branch – 
 
Class of 
Buildings 
  
 
Description 
  
Assessable   Percentage   on 
the   Capital   cost   of   the 
Building   Excluding   value 
of site 
Special 
repairs. 
Ordinary 
repairs. 
A Those  in  good  order  built  by  the Public 
Works  Department  in  a  semi-permanent 
style i.e.  with  pucca  foundation  Kutcha-
pucca    outside    walls,    lime    pointed 
parapets and chimneys terraced jack arch 
or wooden Karri roof over girders. 
½ 1 to 3 
B Those of a similar style of constructions, 
but  not  in  good  conditions,  either  built 
by   the Public   Works   Department   or 
purchased  from  private  individuals  and 
added to or altered after purchase. 
¾ 3 to 5 
C Temporary   buildings,   i.e., those   with 
walls  of  mud  masonry  with  thatched  or 
tiled roof. 
1¼ 5 to 7 
   (3) A charge  of 4½ per cent of the capital cost will be  made in addition to the 
above  to  cover  the  maintenance  of  water-supply,  sanitary  and  electric  installations, 
where such exist. 
    Note.–With  reference  to  the  minimum  and  maximum  rates  fixed  above  for  annual 
ordinary  repairs Superintending  Engineers  of  the  Public  Works  Department,  Buildings  and 
Roads Branch, should arrange to communicate to the Accountant-General such percentages as 
are  actually  applied  in  fixing  the  standard  rent  in  each  individual  case,  so  that  the  rents  fixed 
may be susceptible of scrutiny. 
           (c) Conditions of Tenancy and Rent payable by Government employees. 
5.29.  When  Government  supplies  a  Government  employee  with  a  residence 
leased or owned by it, the following conditions shall be observed: – 
(a)  the  scale  of accommodation  supplied  shall  not,  except  at  the  Government 
employee‟s  own  request  exceed  that  which  is  appropriate  to  the  status  of 
the occupant;  

77 
[Chap.  V]    ADDITIONS TO PAY          [5.29] 
(b)  unless otherwise  expressly provided in these rules,  he  shall, except where 
the residence meant for one  Government employee is shared by more than 
one Government employee, pay– 
(i)    rent calculated at the rate of five per cent of his monthly emoluments; and 
(ii)   municipal  and  other  taxes  payable  by  Government  in  respect  of  the 
residence not being in the nature of house or property tax. 
    Note 1.–Government  employees  who  have  been  allotted  (without their having asked 
for such allotment) accommodation of a lower category that to which they were entitled and if 
that  accommodation carries standard rent less than five per cent of their emoluments  shall be 
charged only standard rent for that accommodation. This note shall not apply in a case where a 
Government  employee  has  himself  asked  for  an  accommodation  of  a lower  category  than  to 
which he was entitled. 
   Note 2.– Shared accommodation has been categorised as follows: – 
       (a)     where the  portions  do  not  have  independent  amenities  like  kitchen,  bath  room 
and lavatory, etc., as in the case of sharing being done at Chandigarh; and  
         (b)     where  a  big  residential  building  has  been  converted  into  independent  portions   
provided with essential amenities like bath room, lavatory and kitchen etc.  
  Note 3.–In cases falling under category (a) of Note 2 above, – 
(1)  at Chandigarh , where accommodation is shared by – 
      (i)  two  Government  employees,  each  Government  employee  shall    be  charged  
rent at the rate of 2 ½
 
per cent of his monthly emoluments; and 
(ii) Three  Government  employees,  each  Government  employee  shall  be charged 
rent at the rate of 1⅔ per cent of his monthly emoluments. 
(2)  at places other than Chandigarh, where the accommodation can be equally shared 
by two or three Government employees the principle of charging rent applicable 
in  Chandigarh  shall  apply  and  where  accommodation  cannot  be  equally  shared 
the rent shall be charged proportionately to the accommodation shared. 
   Note 4.–In   cases falling under category (b) of Note 2 above, the residential    
accommodation  shall  be  allotted  to  suitable  category  of  Government  employees  according  to 
norm  of  cost  and  space  (to  be  calculated  on  the  basis  of  Chandigarh  norm  and  rates)  and 
Government employees shall be liable to pay five per cent of their emoluments irrespective of 
the Standard rent.  
   Note 5.–The Government employees living in cheap (Katcha) houses or in sheds, which 
do  not  provide  the  minimum  residential  amenities,  shall  be  charged  standard  rent  or five per 
cent of their emoluments, whichever is less. 

78 
[5.29-5.31] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
 Note  6.–The  leased  accommodation  shall  be  treated  at  par  with  the  Government  owned 
accommodation  in  the  matter  of    charging  of  rent  and  the  Government  employees  shall  be 
charged  at  the  rate  of five per  cent of  their  emoluments  irrespective  of  the  rent  paid  for  it by 
the Government to the owner. 
  5.30.  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  clause  (b)  of  rule  5.29  above, 
Government may– 
(i)   at  any time,  after  the  standard  rents  have  been  calculated,  under  the 
provision  of  rule  5.23  above,  group  a  number  of residences,  whether  in  a 
particular  area  or  of  a  particular  class  or  classes,  for  the  purpose  of 
assessment of rent, subject to the following conditions being fulfilled: – 
(1)   that the basis of assessment is uniform; and  
(2)  that the amount taken from any Government employee shall not exceed 
five per cent of his monthly emoluments;  
(ii)  by  the  general  or  special  order  provide  for  taking  a  rent  in  excess  of  that 
prescribed in rule 5.29 (b) above from a Government employee – 
(1)  who is not required or permitted to reside on duty at the station at which 
the residence is supplied to him; or  
(2)  who,  at  his  own  request,  is  supplied  with  accommodation  which 
exceeds that which is appropriate to the status of the post held by him; 
or  
(3)  who,  is  in  receipt  of  a  compensatory  allowance  granted  on  account  of 
dearness of living; or 
(4)  who is permitted to sub-let the residence supplied to him; or  
(5)  who sub-lets without permission the residence supplied to him; or     
(6)  who does not vacate the residence after the cancellation of allotment. 
    Note 1.–Under clause (ii) of this rule rent may be recovered in excess of five per cent of 
a Government employee‟s emoluments but not in excess of the standard rent as defined in rule 
5.23. 
                                 Note 2.– If the rent of a building allotted to a Government employee is enhanced from a 
previous date,  nothing shall prevent  Government  from effecting the  recovery at  the  enhanced 
rate with retrospective effect. 
    5.31.  A  Government  employee  who,  at  his  own  request,  is  supplied  with  a 
residence owned or leased by Government of a class higher than that for which he is 
eligible  or  affording  accommodation  in  excess  of  that  which  is  appropriate  to  his 
status,  shall unless  otherwise  decided  by  the  competent  authority, be  charged  the  
full standard rent as calculated under rule 5.23 et seq and shall not be given the benefit 

79 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY       [5.31-5.33] 
of the five per cent concession afforded by rule 5.29 (b). 
  5.32. Omitted. 
  5.33. For the purposes of clause (b) of rule 5.29 above “emoluments” means:– 
                 (i)    Basic Pay and Non-Practising Allowance, wherever applicable; 
     (ii)   Payment from Government revenues and fees if such payments or fees 
are  received  in  the  shape  of  a  fixed  addition  to  monthly  pay  and 
allowances as part of the authorised remuneration of a post; 
    (iii)   Omitted. 
    (iv)   Omitted. 
    (v)    Pension,  other  than  a  pension  drawn  under  the  provisions  of  Chapter       
VIII  of  Volume  II  of  these  rules  or  compensation  received  under  the 
Workmen‟s Compensation Act, 1923, as subsequently amended; 
      (vi)   In the case of a Government employee under suspension and in receipt 
of  a  subsistence  grant,  the  amount  of  the  subsistence  grant,  provided 
that  if  such  Government  employee  is  subsequently  allowed  to  draw 
pay  for  the  period  of  suspension  the  difference  between  the  rent 
recovered on the basis of the subsistence grant and the rent due on the 
basis of the emoluments ultimately drawn shall be recovered from him. 
Note  1.–The  emoluments  of  Government  employee  paid  at  piece-work  rate  shall  be 
determined in such manners as the competent authority may prescribe. 
           Note  2.– The  emoluments  of  a  Government  employee  on  leave  mean  the  emoluments 
drawn  by  him  for  the  last  complete  calendar  month  of  duty  performed  by  him  prior  to  his 
departure on leave. 
                                Note  3.– The amount of pension to be taken into account will be the amount originally 
sanctioned i. e. before commutation if any.  
   Note 4. Omitted. 
   Note 5.– Under clause (ii) above, fees received by a Government employee in the shape 
of a fixed addition to monthly pay and allowances as a part of the authorised remuneration of a 
post count as emoluments for the purposes of clause (b) of rule 5.29, where under rule 5.58 a 
part  of  any  fee  is  required  to  be  credited  by  the  Government  employee  concerned  to 
Government revenues and the remaining fees is  retained  by him, only that portion of the fees 
received by a Government employee which he is allowed to retain under the rules, will count 
as “emoluments” for the purpose of clause (b) of rule 5.29. 

80 
[5.34-5.35] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
   5.34. The Government employee to whom a residence is allotted,–vide rule 5.46 
et  seq  is  responsible  for  the  rent  recoverable  under  the  rules  during  the  period  of 
allotment unless exempted by competent authority under the provisions of rule 5.35.      
   Rent shall be recovered monthly in arrears for the period of allotment. 
              (d)  Rent-free accommodation and waiving or reducing                    
                     the amount of rent. 
 5.35. In   special   circumstances,   for   reasons which   should   be   recorded,   a 
competent authority– 
(a)  may,  by  general  or  special  order,  grant  rent-free  accommodation  to  any 
Government employee or class of Government employees; or  
  (b)  may, by special order, waive  or reduce the amount of rent to be  recovered 
from any Government employee or class of Government employees; or  
(c)  may,  by  general or  special  order,  waive  or reduce  the  amount  of  municipal 
and  other  taxes,  not  being  in the  nature  of  house  or  property  tax,  to  be 
recovered   from   any   Government   employee or   class   of   Government 
employees. 
Note 1.–The following are types of cases in which such exemption or reduction may be 
sanctioned:– 
(a)  When  a  Government  employee  is performing  the  duties  of  a  post, in  addition  to 
those of his substantive post and already pays rent for a house. 
(b)   When a Government employee, in addition to the duties of a post, carries on those 
of another post which preclude him from occupying the house. 
(c)   When a Government  employee  has  been  promoted  or transferred  to  a  post  in  the 
same  station  and  it  is  not  considered  necessary  that  he  should  change  his 
residence. 
(d)   Omitted  
  (e)   When a Government employee officiating in a post for a period not exceeding two 
months  is  actually  prevented  from  occupying  the  house  provided  for  him  by 
circumstances  which  the  competent  authority  considers  sufficient  to  warrant  an 
exception being made in his favour. 
           Note  2.–When  rents are  fixed  in  accordance  with  rule  5.23  and  when  one  or  more 
Government employees supplied with residence in the particular areas are granted a house free 
of rent or at reduced rent, the proper course is to apply rule 5.23 that and rule 5.35 afterwards 
that is the ordinary rent of the occupant of each house should be fixed under rule 5.23 and any 
reduction necessary should then be made under this rule. 
Note 3.–A  list  of  Government  employees  who  have  been  granted  rent  free 
accommodation under this rule is given in Appendix 7. 

81 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY       [5.36-5.39] 
5.36. When, under clause (a) of rule 5.35, a Government employee is provided 
with quarters free of rent the exemption from rent shall, in the absence of any orders 
of  Government  to  the  contrary,  be  considered  to  be  complete, i.e., no additional 
charge  shall  be made  in  respect  of  the  rent  of  special  services,  i.e., sanitary,  water-
supply  and  electricity,  in  the  building  the  cost  of  which  has  been  included  in  the 
capital cost of the building. 
The  concession  of  rent-free  quarters  does  not  carry  with  it  the  free  supply  of 
water  and  electric  energy,  the  cost  of  which  must  be  defrayed  by  the  Government 
employee  himself.  The  rent  of  water  and  electric-meters  the  cost  of  which  has  not 
been  included  in  the  capital  cost  of  the  building  is  also  payable  by  the  Government 
employee. 
  Note  1.–The  occupants of staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant to Government 
House are exempt from payment of charges for electricity consumed. As regards water charges 
see the “Exception” below the section “Water Charges” in rule 5.44. 
 
   Note 2.– See also rule 5.44 
   5.37.  Omitted. 
   5.38.  A  competent  authority  may  sanction  remission  of  rent  due  for  the 
occupation  of a Government  building  when  building  is  rendered  uninhabitable  by 
reason of extensive repairs being in progress, or from any other cause : Provided that 
if  the  occupier finds  that the  house  has  become  uninhabitable  he  shall  at once  report 
the matter to the Executive Engineer in charge of the building, who will immediately 
inspect  it  and  forward  a  report  on  the  subject  to  the  Superintending  Engineer.    The 
latter will take such steps in the matter as he considers necessary, reporting his action 
to the competent authority, who will then decide whether partial or total remission of 
rent is to be allowed. 
  Note.–Inconvenience caused by petty or ordinary annual repairs is insufficient to warrant 
remission of rent which should be granted only when extensive structural repairs justifying in 
the opinion of the competent authority in vacation of the building, are carried out.     
  5.39.  When  a  building  is  occupied  partly  as  a  residence  and  partly  as  an  office 
the capital value of the portion occupied as a residence should be separately estimated 
for the purpose of rule 5.23.  The cost of maintenance of the residential portion should 
also be  separately  estimated  and  accounted  for.   This  is  usually  done  on the  basis  of 
plinth area. 
    Note.–When  (a)  separate  office accommodation  is  provided  for  the  occupant,  and        
(b) the  use  of  part of  his residence for office  or  business  purposes is optional, no deduction  

82 
[5.39-5.42] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
from the rent is permissible on this account. Where, however, a Government employee though 
provided  with  office  accommodation  elsewhere  than  in  his  residence  is,  in  the  opinion  of  the 
competent authority, obliged to set apart a portion of his residence, for the reception of visitors 
both  official  and  non-official  on  business,  a  deduction  from  the  rent  is  permissible  on  this 
account to the extent of half the assessed rent of the accommodation so used. 
    5.40.  In  leasing,  acquiring  or  constructing  an  official residence  for  any  one  of 
the  Government  employees  mentioned  in  column  2  of  the  statement  in  rule  5.42, 
Government  will  arrange  to  provide  accommodation  for  visitors  in  the  shape  of  a 
waiting room, and for a Commissioner or Deputy Commissioner-quarters for  a police 
guard.  The  accommodation  so  provided plus  half  of  the  room  set  apart  for  the 
reception  of  visitors  will  not  be  taken  into  account  in  calculating  the  standard  rent 
fixed for such residence under rule 5.23. 
 
           Note   1.–Where  waiting  rooms  have  been  set  apart  for  visitors  in  residences  of        
Group  „A‟  and  Group  „B‟ Government  employees  entitled  to  rebate  of  rent  under  this  rule, 
rebate will also be allowed for the portion of verandahs, if any, attached to the waiting rooms. 
 
   Note  2.–The  guards  quarters  and  visitors  waiting  room,  with  visitors  Book  shed,  and 
half of the room set apart for the reception of visitors in the residence of the Honourable Chief 
Justice of the High Court are to be treated as non-residential portions for purpose of calculation 
of rent.  Rebate of rent will be granted in respect thereof. 
 
   5.41. A rebate of rent will be allowed to the Deputy Collectors of the Irrigation 
Department  for  the  room  in  their  residential  quarters  occupied  by  peons  when 
administrative  requirements  necessitate  their  living  in  the  room  provided  in  the 
quarters and it is not used for Deputy Collector‟s private purposes. 
 
  5.42. In the case of privately-owned buildings hired directly by the Government 
employee  mentioned in  column  2  of  the  statement  below  for  use  as  residences,  the 
following concessions will be admissible when suitable accommodation (other than a 
mere  open  verandah)  for  visitors  or in  the  case,  of  Commissioner  or Deputy 
Commissioner for a police guard, as the case may be, is set aside to the satisfaction of 
the authority mentioned in column 3 of the statement: – 
 
(i)    The rent of the waiting room and half the rent of the room in which visitors 
are received and the rent of the quarters for the police guard will be borne 
by Government; 
 
(ii)   The  portion  of  the  rent  which  is,  thus,  to  be  borne  by  Government  on 
account  of  the  waiting  and  reception  rooms  and  quarters  for  the  police 
guard  will be assessed by the Executive  Engineers concerned on the value  

83 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY     [5.42-5.43] 
        of the   accommodation   in   question. Its   amount   will   bear   the   same 
proportion  to  the  rent  of  the  premises  occupied  as  the  space  occupied  by 
the accommodation provided bears to the total plinth area of the building. 
(iii)  The  portion  payable  for  the  waiting  and  reception  rooms  will  be  paid  by 
the Executive Engineer to the landlord. He will also  arrange  with  the 
Police Department  for  the  portion  payable  for  the  quarters  for  the  police 
guard being paid by that Department as a police contingent charge direct to 
the Government employee occupying the building. 
                                                          STATEMENT 
1                           2                                                                                      3 
1. Commissioners  ...                                    
       
 
 
  Commissioner  of Division 
  concerned. 
2. Deputy Commissioners                    ... 
3. Settlement  officers,  Assistant  Settlement 
Officers,    Colonization    and    Assistant 
Colonization Officers. 
4. Members of the I.A.S or P.C.S. in charge 
of Sub-Divisions. 
5. Principal, Agricultural College.   ...Director of Agriculture. 
6. Registrar, High Court of Judicature.   ...Honourable   Judges   of   the 
High Court. 
7. Inspector-General  of  Police,  all  Deputy 
Inspectors-General   of   Police,   and   all 
Superintendents   of   Police   (except   the 
Principal,   Police   Training   School,   the 
Personal    Assistant to    the    Inspector- 
General of Police and the Assistant to the 
Inspector General, Special Branch) 
 Inspector-General of Police. 
8. Deputy  Superintendent  of  Police  placed 
in charge of Sub-Division. 
 Ditto. 
5.43.  Constant  changes  in  the  accommodation  to  be set  apart  for  visitors  are 
depreciated on principle, but so long as these changes are necessary and are made for 
sound reasons, Government employees concerned can set apart different rooms during 
summer and winter on condition that the accommodation set apart – 
(a)    is to the satisfaction of their superiors; 
(b)    is not less in area than that for which Government waives rent; and  

84 
[5.43-5.44] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
(c)   if  in  excess  of  that  originally  reserved,  Government  is  not  called  upon    to      
waive a large portion of the rent than that already fixed. 
     RENT FOR SPECIAL SERVICES  
 5.44. If a residence is supplied with services other than water supply, sanitary, or 
electric  installation  and  fittings  such  as  furniture,  fans,  tennis  courts  or  garden,  the 
cost of which is not taken into account in calculating the standard rent of the residence 
under  rule  5.23  and  which  are  maintained  at  the  cost  of  Government,  rent  shall  be 
charged for these in addition to the rent payable under rules 5.29 to 5.32. The tenants 
will  also  be  required  to  pay  the  cost  of  water,  electric  energy,  etc.  consumed.  The 
additional rents and charges will be fixed and recovered in full as below. A competent 
authority may, however, in very special circumstances and for reason which should be 
recorded,  waive  or  reduce  the  additional  rent  and  charges  for  any  of  the  special 
amenities referred to above. 
         Note  1.–The  value  of  the  site  shall  not  be  taken  into  account  in  calculating  the  rent  of 
special services under this rule.  
          Note 2.–Where however, it is so directed by general or special order: – 
(a)   The  value  of  the  site,  and  the  cost  of  its  preparation,  shall  be  included  in  the 
capital cost of tennis courts and gardens.  
(b)   Departmental  charges  shall  be  included  in  the  capital  cost  of  furniture,  ceiling 
fans,  tennis  courts  and  gardens  as  well  as  their  maintenance,  depreciation  and 
storage  charges.  The  percentage  rates  for  maintenance,  depreciation  and  storage 
shall  not  be  levied  on  the  capital  cost  after  the  addition  of  departmental  charges        
but before such addition. Interest shall, however, be calculated on the capital cost 
including departmental charges.  
(c)   The cost of sanitary,  water-supply and electric installation may be excluded from 
the capital cost of tennis courts and gardens. 
      Should the cost of sanitary, water-supply and electric installations be ordered to be 
excluded, rent for such installations shall be levied at the rates specified under rule 5.23 (d). 
For  cases  in  which  the  above  provision  will  apply  see  paragraph  3.27  of  the  Punjab   
Public Works Department Code under furniture. 
 

85 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY              [5.44] 
 (a)    FURNITURE 
The rent shall be recovered at the rate of 15 per cent per annum on the capital 
cost as detailed below: – 
                                                                                  Rs. 
(a)  Maintenance                                             ..       4 per cent 
(b)  Interest                                                     ..       5 per cent 
(c)  Depreciation including renewals               
 and replacements                                    ..        6 per cent  
 
                                                                               Total       ..     15 per cent   
 
           Note.–Free furniture is provided in the quarter of the Private Secretary to the Governor, 
Punjab, at Raj Bhawan, Chandigarh. 
                                          CEILING FANS 
The rent shall be  recovered at the rate  of 17 per cent per annum on the capital 
cost as detailed below and shall be recovered during the whole of the year – 
                                                                                  Rs. 
  (a) Interest                                                   ..       4 per cent  
  (b) Depreciation                                         ..       6½ per cent 
  (c) Maintenance                                         ..       4½ per cent  
  (d) Storage Charges                                  ..       2 per cent  
     Total                                                         ..      17 per cent  
 (b)   TENNIS COURT 
Rent  to  be  recovered  for  a  tennis  court  should  cover  both  interest  on  the 
capital  outlay  involved  at  the  rate  prescribed  by  the  competent  authority  for  the 
purpose  of  rule 5.23(b) and average actual maintenance  charges  for  the past three 
years.  The  charges  which  may  be  incurred  in  connection  with  the  provision  and 
maintenance of tennis court are: – 
        A.   In regard to courts in the plains – 
      (1)   construction of the court and of retaining walls where necessary; 
        (2)   surfacing of the court with bajri, grass, cement, etc., at the time of   
                construction.  

86 
[5.44] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
 B.   In regard to courts in the hills – 
        (1)  and (2) as in section A above; 
         (3)  provision  and  erection  of  posts  and  wire-netting  for  the  purpose  of 
enclosing  the  court  and  of  permanently  fixed  posts  for  suspending 
lawn-tennis nets;  
         (4) provision  and  erection  of  fixture  and  appurtenances  for  hanging 
screens; and  
        (5)  maintenance of items 3 and 4 only.     
    Note  1.–The  cost  of  providing  and  renewing  tennis-sets,  the  marking  of  courts,  the 
provision of screens, the maintenance of the surface of the courts and also the maintenance of 
items (3) and (4) in section B above, in so far as they relate to the courts in the plains, should, 
on no account, be admitted as a charge against the State.    
    Note  2.–For  the  purpose  of  these  rules  the  maintenance  charges  shall  be  revised  after 
every three years. 
 
    Note 3.–See also note under the head “Garden” below:– 
 
(c)   GARDEN 
 
  Both  interest  on  the  outlay  incurred  at  the  rate  prescribed  by  the  competent 
authority for the  purposes  of rule  5.23 (b) and actual maintenance  charges should be 
recovered. 
  The  cost  of  planting  shade  trees,  shrubs  and  hedges  in  the  compounds  of 
residential  buildings, of  transporting  soil  in  a  portion  of the compound meant for a 
garden, if the nature of the existing surface soil renders such transportation necessary 
in order  to  form  a  garden,  of  grassing  plots,  or  sinking  a  well  and  of  providing 
irrigation  channels  may  be  debited  to  public  funds  as  capital  expenditure  on  the 
residence  and  included  in  the  capital  cost  thereof  for  the  purpose  of  assessment  of 
standard  rent.  The  maintenance  of  shrubs  and  hedges  and  of  grass  plots  shall  be  a 
liability of the tenant.  The sale proceeds of timber shall be credited to Government. 
    Note.– If  the  capital  outlay  on  the  tennis court/gardens is  not  known,  it  may  be 
determined  by  the  Divisional  Officer  with  reference  to  the  market  value  of  similar  tennis-
court/gardens in the vicinity. 
 

87 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY     [5.44-5.45] 
 (d)  WATER CHARGES 
Charges  for  water  supplied  to  tenants  of Government  residential  buildings  are 
assessed as follows:– 
 
(a)    Every  official  occupying  a  Government  quarters  with  a  separate  water 
connection must pay water charges including the  meter rent as fixed  by a 
municipality,   District   Board   or   the   Public Health   Department.   No 
exception shall be granted in such cases. 
 
(b)   Where  quarters  have  not  been  provided  with  separate  water  connections 
and  the  occupants  have  to  use  outside,  and  technically  public  taps;  no 
water charges should be recovered from them. 
 
(c)   Where water tax as distinct from water charges is levied such tax is payable 
by tenants. 
 
   Exception.–This rule does not apply to Secretariat and Raj Bhawan employees 
occupying staff quarters and other buildings appurtenant to Raj Bhawan, Chandigarh. 
 
CLASSIFFICATION OF RESIDENCES 
    5.45.  Government  buildings  intended  for  occupation  as  residences  are  divided 
into two classes:– 
Class I.  Buildings which will ordinarily be occupied by Government employees   
liable to pay the full standard rent subject to the limit of five per cent of 
their emoluments. 
Class II. Buildings from which recovery of the full standard rent is not expected, 
that  is,  buildings  which  will  ordinarily  be  occupied  by  Government 
employees who  are  entitled  to  accommodation  rent  free  or  at  reduced 
rents under the sanction of competent authority. 
 Note  1.–The  fact  that  a  building  in  class  I  is  occasionally  occupied  by  a  Government 
employee  who  is  entitled  to  accommodation  rent  free,  or  at reduced  rents,  will  not  justify  its 
removal from class I to class II, and similarly a building in class II should not be transferred to 
class I whenever it is occupied by a Government employee who may be required to pay the full 
standard  rent  (subject  to five per  cent  of  emoluments).    Buildings  should  be  transferred  from 
one  class  to  the  other  only  when there  is  a  permanent  change  in  the  conditions  under  which 
they  will  ordinarily  be  rented.  Transfers  should  be  made  under  the  orders  of  the  competent 
authority, and should have effect in all cases from the commencement of a financial year.  
  

88 
[5.45-5.49]                          THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
                                 Note  2.–When  a  building  in  class  II  is occupied  by  any  person  who  is  not  entitled  to 
quarters  rent  free,  the  rent  to  be  paid  shall  be  fixed  by  the  competent  authority  in  general  in 
accordance with the rules in this chapter. 
   Note  3.–In  the  Forest  Department, Group  „A‟  and  Group  „B‟ Government employees 
not  entitled  to  rent-free  accommodation  are  permitted  to  occupy  quarters  meant  for  free 
occupation  on  payments  of  rents  to  be  assessed  by  the  Public  Works  Department  under  the 
rules in this Chapter. 
                            GENERAL RULES AND INSRUCTIONS REGARDING  
                            ALLOTMENT OF RESIDENCE 
 
   5.46. The expression “allotted” means “provided” and a Government employee 
residing  in  a  Government  residence  before  definite  allotment  may  be  regarded  as 
having  been  allotted that  residence.  Subject  to  the  provision  of  rule  5.51-A,  an 
incumbent, permanent or temporary, of a post for whose benefit a residence has been 
constructed, bought or leased is allotted that residence. 
   Note.–A  residence  will  not  be  held  to  have  been  allotted  to  a  Government  employee 
who shares it by private arrangement with another Government employee to whom it has been 
allotted. 
 
   5.47.  A  Government  employee  shall  not  be  considered  to  be  in  occupation  of 
residence when he proceeds on leave unless the competent authority otherwise directs. 
 
   5.48. The period of allotment is determined as follows:– 
 
(a)   If the house has been constructed, purchased or leased for the benefit of a 
particular post, it is the period of incumbency, permanent or temporary, of 
each  Government  employee  in  that  appointment  except  in  the  case 
provided for in rule 5.51-A.  
 
 (b)   Otherwise it is for twelve months at a time, but terminates on his transfer  
from the place where he is stationed. 
 
5.49. When during a twelve months tenancy, a Government residence is vacated 
owing either to the occupant‟s appointment having been altered or to his proceeding 
on leave, the  residence should, when this  is  possible and always  when  occupation of 
the  residence  is  a  condition  of  the  tenure  or the  appointment,  be  allotted  to  his 
successor in office and rent recovered accordingly. 
 

89 
 [Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY    [5.49-5.50] 
          When  a  Government  employee  takes  over  charge  of  an  office  entitling  him  to 
occupy  a Government  residential building,  he  should,  apart  from  the  usual  charge 
certificate  on  assumption  of  office,  sign  a  supplementary  certificate  stating  that  he 
becomes  responsible  for  the  rent  of  the  building  from  a  given  date.  The  relieved 
Government  employees  should  similarly  state  that  his  responsibility  has  ceased.  A 
copy  of  this  certificate  should  be  sent  to  the  Accountant  General  and  the  Executive 
Engineer concerned to enable the former to exercise a  check on the  prompt recovery 
of  rent  and  the  latter  to  complete  his  records, etc.  A  Government  employee  will  be 
held responsible for the rent until such date as he vacates the building and:– 
(a)   after informing the  Executive  Engineer of the  division in which  the  house 
is situated of the vacation, hands over the key to him; or  
(b)   in  the  case  of  relief  by  another  official,  furnishes  the  Executive Engineer 
concerned with the certificate referred to above. 
If  an  office  does  not  carry  with  it  any  responsibility  for  the  rent  of  a  building, 
the supplementary certificate will be blank and will be signed with a line drawn across 
it. 
5.50. A Government employee in occupation of a residence may sub-let it subject 
to the following conditions:– 
(a)   the   lessee   shall   be   approved   by   the   Chief   Engineer,   Public   Works 
Department, incharge of the building; 
(b)    the sub-tenancy shall not be recognised by Government; 
(c)    the  lessor  shall  remain  personally  responsible  for  the  rent  and  for  any 
damage caused to the residence beyond fair wear and tear; 
(d)   the  sub-tenancy  shall  terminate  not later  than  the  date  on  which  lessor 
ceases to hold the post to which the residence has been allotted; 
(e)    the rent payable by the lessee shall not, except with the previous sanction 
of Government, exceed the rent payable to Government by the lessor; 
(f)    the  rent payable  to Government by the  lessor shall be  the  rent payable  by 
him, if he has not sub-let the residence or the rent payable by the lessee, if 
the   residence   had   been   allotted   to   him   direct   by   the   Government, 
whichever is higher; 
(g)   in the case of sub-letting of a Government residence when the lessor is not 
entitled to rent-free quarter or house-rent allowance in lieu but the lessee is         
so  entitled,  the  rent  payable  by  the  lessor,  should  be  the  rent  payable  by 
him, if he had  not sub-let the residence or the rent payable by the lessee, if        

90 
[5.50-5.51A] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
        the  residence  had  been  allotted  to  him  direct  by  Government  otherwise 
than free of rent, whichever is higher; 
(h)  when a Government residence is sub-let and the lessee and the lessor are, 
or  the  lessor  is,  entitled  to  rent-free  quarters  or  house-rent  allowance  in 
lieu,  the  following  procedure  should be  adopted  in  regard  to  the  recovery  
of rent:– 
       (i)  when both the lessor and the lessee are entitled to rent-free quarters or  
house  rent  allowance  in  lieu,  the  lessor  will  pay  to  Government  an 
amount equivalent to the higher of the two house-rent allowances; and 
                  (ii) when the lessor is entitled to rent-free quarters or house-rent allowance 
in  lieu  and  the  lessee  is  not  so  entitled,  the  lessor  will  pay  to 
Government   an   amount   equivalent   to   the   house-rent   allowance 
admissible to him or to the rent payable by the lessee if the house had 
been allotted to him direct by Government, whichever is higher. 
Note 1.–Whenever a residence cannot be allotted to the incumbent of the post to which 
it is attached or to a Government employee of the class for which it was constructed it may be 
let  to  a  Government  employee  not  holding  the  particular  post  or  not  belonging  to  that  class 
subject to the conditions that –  
   (i)    the  allotment  ceases  within  two  months  of a Government  employee  for  whom  the   
residence is intended becoming available at the station as a tenant, and  
  (ii)   the  rent  to  be  recovered  under  the  rules  from  the  temporary  tenant  is  not  less  than 
two-thirds of the standard rent of the house. 
   A  competent  authority  may  relax the  provisions  of  this  note  as  a  special  case  if 
considered necessary. 
   Note 2.–Where only a part of the residence is sub-let, the rent payable by the lessee shall 
not exceed the rent calculated on the basis of the plinth area occupied by him. 
   5.51. Omitted. 
 5.51-A.  If  a  Government  employee  to  whom  a  residence  is  allotted  dies,  is 
dismissed  from  the  service  or  retires  from  the  service,  the  allotment  to  him  of  the 
residence shall be cancelled, with effect from two months after the date of his death, 
dismissal  or  retirement  as  the  case  may  be,  or  with  effect  from  any  date  after  such 
death, dismissal or retirement on which the residence is actually vacated whichever is 
earlier.  In  such  cases  the  recovery  of  rent  should  be  governed  by  rule  5.29(b)  i.e., 
while the original allotment subsists, rent should be charged at the same concessional 
rate  as  was  being  paid  by the Government  employee  before  his  death,  dismissal  or 
retirement as the case may be.  Similarly the concession of rent-free quarters, if it was 
granted in any case, should continue during the period of grace.   

91 
 [Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY        [5.52-5.55] 
   5.52. In the case of residences under the control of the Forest Department these 
rules should be read as if the words “Public Works Department”, “Chief Engineer, and 
Executive Engineer” were “Forest Department”, “Chief Conservator of Forests” and 
“Divisional Forest Officer”, respectively. 
 
III-COMPENSATIONS 
5.53 to 5.54.  Omitted. 
     IV-HONORARIA AND FEES 
HONORARIA 
         5.55. Subject to the condition prescribed in rule 5.56, a competent authority may 
grant or permit a Government employee to receive an honorarium as remuneration for 
work  performed  which  is  occasional  or  intermittent  in  character  and  either  so 
laborious or of such  special merit as to justify a special reward.  Except when special 
reasons, which should be recorded in writing, exist for a departure from this provision, 
sanction  to  the  grant or  acceptance  of an honorarium should not be given unless the 
work  has  been  undertaken  with  the  prior  consent  of  the  competent  authority  and  its 
amount has been settled in advance. 
   Note  1.–In  a  case  where  an  honorarium  is  to  be  granted  to  a  Government  employee 
there must first be an order of competent authority permitting acceptance of the honorarium by 
the  Government  employee,  and  there  must  also  be  an  order  sanctioning  the  grant  of  the 
honorarium.  In  a  case  where  an  honorarium  is  to  be  granted  to  a  Government  employee 
belonging to a department other than the one which is to pay it there should, therefore, be two 
sanctions, one for the payment of the honorarium by the department in which the expenditure 
is to be incurred and the  other for the  acceptance of the  honorarium  which  must be  issued by 
the  department to  which the  Government employee belongs.  In order to avoid duplication of 
work in having to give two different sanctions, one single sanction should be given both to the 
grant  and  acceptance  of  the  honorarium  and  this  sanction  should  be  given  by  the  department 
paying  the  honorarium  after  obtaining  the  concurrence  of  the  department  in  which  the 
Government employee happens to be serving. 
  Exception.–A  Government  employee  under  the  Punjab  Government  may  accept 
remuneration   up   to   any   amount   for   work   connected   with   an   examination   or 
examinations  conducted  by  the  Union  Public  Service Commission  and  up to  the  limit 
of  Rs. 10,000 during  a  financial  year  for  work  connected  with  an  examination  or 
examinations  conducted  by  the  Punjab  Public  Service  Commission  or  Subordinate 
Services Selection  Board,  Punjab,  or the Director,  Technical  Education and  Industrial 
Training,  Punjab,  without  the  sanction  of  the  authority  competent  to  permit  the 
acceptance of a fee or honorarium by him. For the acceptance of honorarium in excess 
of  Rs.  10,000 in  the  case  of  work  connected  with  the  examination  or  examinations 
conducted by the Punjab Public Service Commission or Subordinate Services Selection 

92 
[5.55-5.56] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. V] 
Board,  Punjab  or the  Director  Technical  Education and  Industrial  Training, Punjab, 
sanction of the Punjab Government in the Administrative Department under which the 
Government employee concerned is serving is necessary. 
   Note  2.–The sanctioning authority shall record in writing that due regard has been paid 
to the  general  principle  enunciated in rule  3.10 and shall record also the  reasons  which in his 
opinion justify the grant of the extra remuneration. 
   Note  3.–Note  2  above  requires  that  the  reasons  for  the  grant  should  be  recorded  in 
writing  as  it  is  intended  that  the  grant  of  an  honorarium  should  be  carefully  controlled  by 
Government and scrutinized by audit and that audit should be given an effective opportunity of 
comment  if  it  be  deemed  necessary.  Accountant-General  may,  therefore,  require  that  the 
reasons for the grant of an honorarium should be communicated to him in each case. 
           Note 4.–The amount of an honorarium must be fixed with due regard to the value of the 
service in return of which it is given. 
   Note 5.–Temporary increase in work due to the holding of special conferences under the 
auspices  of  a  department  or  subordinate  authority  or  of  inter-departmental  committees  are 
normal incidents of Government service and form part of the legitimate duties of Government 
employee according to the general principle enunciated in rule 3.10. Those so employed have, 
therefore, no claim to extra remuneration. 
   Note  6.–The  grant of  honorarium to the heirs of a  deceased Government employee  for 
work done by him is unobjectionable in audit. 
   Note 7.–No honorarium should be granted to Group „A‟ and Group „B‟ officers engaged 
on work in connection with the setting up of companies, corporations, etc. which forms a part 
of their normal duties even if they work beyond office hours. 
 
   5.56. When the service rendered falls within the course of the ordinary duties of 
the  Government  employee  performing  it,  the  test  of  special  merit  prescribed  in  rule 
5.55 must be very strictly applied. 
                    Note.–The  expression  “within  the  course  of  the  ordinary  duties”  has  been  defined  as 
follows:– 
 
          A  service  rendered  by  a  Government  employee  is  said  to  be  within  the  course  of  the 
duties of that Government employee when it is of the same nature as that for which his regular 
employment  exists.  The  test  that  should  be  applied  in  deciding  any  particular  case  is  to 
determine  whether  the  service  rendered  is  such  as  the  Government  employee  habitually 
performs in the course of his ordinary duties. A service does not cease to be within the course 
of  the  duties  of  the  Government  employee  because  it  has  been  rendered  for  an  object  not 
concerned  with  the  usual  operations  of  his  department  or  involves  an  unusual  expenditure  of 
labour. 
 

93 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY          [5.57] 
FEES 
   5.57. Subject to rules under which a fee may be received by a medical officer of  
Government for services other that professional attendance (see note 5 below ) or an 
expert witness summoned  in a  criminal court (see note  6 below) and subject to rules 
5.58  to  5.60,  a  competent  authority  may  permit  a  Government  employee,  if  it be 
satisfied   that   this   can   be   done   without   detriment   to   his   official   duties   or 
responsibilities, to perform a specified service or series of service for a private person 
or  body  or  for  a  public  body including  a  body administering  a  local  fund  and  to 
receive  as  remuneration  therefor,  if  the  service  be  material,  a  non-recurring  or 
recurring fee. 
   Note  1.–The  sanctioning  authority  must  make  it  clear  that  sanction  under  this  rule  to 
perform work does not involve sanction to the acceptance of fee in excess of his own power of 
sanction under this rule. 
   Note   2.–Acceptance  of  fees  by  medical  officers  of  Government  for  professional 
attendance is regulated by the rules in Chapter VI of the Punjab Medical Manual. 
   Note  3.–Government  employees  of  the  Education, Agriculture  and  Animal  Husbandry 
(including Fisheries) and Health Department and the teaching staff of the Punjab Engineering 
College  are  authorised  to  undertake  work  of  examining  and  setting  papers  in  respect  of 
University  and  Engineering  and  other  examinations  and  to  accept  remunerations  therefor  : 
Provided  the  total  sum  so  drawn  by  an  individual  does  not  in  the  case  of  Agriculture  and 
Animal  Husbandry  (including  Fisheries)  Department  Examinations  exceed Rs.  5,000 and  in 
the  case  of  the  Education,  Health  and  Engineering  Department  Examinations Rs.  10,000 in  a 
financial year. 
 The  teaching  staff  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  and  Animal  Husbandry  (including 
Fisheries)  is  permitted  to  retain  fees  up  to Rs.  5,000 in  a  financial  year  for  working  as 
Supervisors,  Superintendents,  Deputy  Superintendents,  Invigilators,  etc.  at  the  University 
examination: provided the  work is undertaken outside  the  normal  hours of duty. The  officials 
besides  teaching  work,  doing  research work  are  not  permitted  to  undertake  this  work. 
Government  employees  of  the  Education  Department  are  permitted  to  retain  fees  upto            
Rs. 10,000 for working as Supervisors or Superintendents at University Examinations provided 
the work is undertaken outside the normal hours of duty.  For the acceptance of fees in excess 
of this sum the  sanction of the  competent authority  should  be  obtained. In order to watch the 
above-mentioned limits the Heads of Departments concerned should obtain annually from the 
Government  employees  of  their  respective  department,  who  receive  remuneration  under  this 
note, a statement showing the amount received by each Government employee in the preceding 
financial year.     
                                        Note 4.–Notes 2 to 4 under rule 5.55 apply mutatis mutandis in the case of fees also. 
    
 
     

94 
 
[5.57-5.58] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
    Note  5.–The  rules prescribing the  conditions and limits subject to  which a  fee  may be 
received  by  medical  officers  of  Government  other  than  professional  attendance  are  contained 
in Appendix 8 of the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part II. 
    Note  6.–The  rules  for  the  payment  of  fees  to  expert  witnesses  summoned  in  Criminal 
Courts are contained in Appendix-8A of Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part II. 
    Note  7.–The Personal Assistants/Private Secretaries/Stenographers, etc. attached to the 
officers   nominated   as   Chairmen   and   Members   of   the   Board   of   Directors   of   certain 
Corporations  and  Companies  should  not  be  allowed  any  additional  remunerations  from 
Corporations or Companies, when the officers with whom they are attached are allotted duties 
on the Board of Directors of Corporation or Companies as part of their normal functions. 
   5.58. Unless the competent authority by special orders or otherwise direct one-
third of any fees in excess of Rs. 5,000 or if, a recurring fee, of Rs. 2,500 a year, paid 
to Government employee shall be  credited  to general revenues; provided  that the fee 
to  be  retained  by  the  Government  employee  concerned  will  not  be  reduced below     
Rs.  5,000 if  non-recurring, or Rs.  2,500 a  year if recurring  and  provided  further  that 
where a fee is paid for work done during the time which would otherwise be spent in 
the  performance  of  official  duties,  the  entire  fee  must  be  credited  to  Government, 
unless  the  competent  authority  for  special reasons  which  should  be  recorded,  directs 
otherwise.  
        Note   1.–Fees   received   by   Government   employees   for   giving   expert   evidence   on 
technical matters before a court of law should also be governed by this rule. 
  Note 2.–Non-recurring and recurring fees should be dealt with separately and should not 
be added for the purpose of crediting one-third to general revenues under this rule. In the case 
of the former, the limit of Rs. 5,000 prescribed in this rule should be applied in each individual 
case and in the case of the latter the limit of Rs. 2,500 should be applied with reference to the 
total recurring fees for the financial year. 
  Note 3.–The fees received by Government employees from the following institutions are 
exempted from the operation of this rule:– 
(1)   Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. 
(2)   Indian Roads Congress. 
(3)   India Cattle Show Committee. 
(4)   Inter-University Board.  
(5)   Inter-Provincial Board for Anglo-Indian Education. 
(6)   Indian Red Cross Society. 
(7)   Bharat  Scouts  and  Guides,  Punjab  (Exemption  relates  only  to  fees received  by   
Government employee for doing clerical work) 
(8)   Child Activity Centres. 
(9)   Bharat Sewak Samaj. 

95 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY              [5.58] 
                         Provided the work for them is done during the time which will not be otherwise spent in 
the performance of official duties. 
          Note 4.–The fees referred to in note 3 below Rule 5.57 in excess of Rs. 5,000 in the case 
of   Government   employees of   Agriculture   and   Animal   Husbandry   (including   Fisheries) 
Department and Rs. 10,000 in the case of Government employees of the Education and Health 
Departments  and  the  Punjab  Engineering College  during  a  financial  year  shall  be  shared 
between the  Government employees and the  Government in the  ratio of 2 :1, i.e. one  third of 
the  amount  in  excess  of  these  limits  should  be  credited  to  Government.  These  orders  will, 
however,  not  be  applicable to  the  fees  received  by  Government  employees of  the  Health 
Department   for   acting   as   Examiners   of   the   Punjab   University,   Punjabi   University   or 
Kurukshetra University or the Punjab State Medical Faculty. In their case, the orders regarding 
the  sharing  of  fees  would  apply  only  to  the  fees  received  by  them  for  acting  as  examiners  of 
the outside Universities and bodies. 
When  a  Medical  Officer  conducting  examination/inspection  on  behalf  of  an  Indian 
University other than the Universities of the Punjab and the Medical Council of India does not 
take  regular/casual  leave  for  the  purpose  he  shall  credit  the  entire  fee  received  by  him  to  the 
Punjab  Government  Revenues.  In  case  however,  the  period  of  his  absence  is  treated  as 
regular/casual leave, the orders of sharing the fees will apply.     
           Note  5.–The  term  “Fee”  used  in  this  rule  shall  not  include  conveyance  allowance, 
provided  the  amount  of  conveyance allowance received  by  a  Government  employee  from  a 
source  other  than  the  revenues  of  the  State  does not  exceed  what  would  be  admissible  under 
the Punjab Government Rules under similar circumstances and is not a  source of profit to the 
Government employee concerned. In case of doubt, a competent authority may decide whether 
the conveyance allowance thus received by a Government employee is reasonable as compared 
with the standard adopted by the Government for the grant of conveyance allowance and is not 
a source of profit to the Government employee. 
   Note  6.–If  any  fee  to  which  this  rule  applies  exceeds Rs. 5,000 non-recurring  or            
Rs.  2,500 a  year  recurring  or  Rs.  5,000 in  the  case  of  Government  employees  of  Agriculture 
and  Animal Husbandry  (including  Fisheries)  Department  and Rs. 10,000 in  the  case  of 
Government  employees  of  the  Education  and Health  Department  and  the  Punjab  Engineering 
College,  referred  to  in  note  3  below  rule  5.57  during  a  financial  year,  one-third  of  the  total 
amount payable, as the case  may be, should be credited to general revenues provided that the 
amount  retained  by  the Government  employee concerned  will  not,  merely  owing  to  the 
operation  of  this  rule,  be  reduced  below  Rs.  5,000 if  non-recurring  or  Rs.  2,500 a  year  if 
recurring or Rs. 5,000 or Rs. 10,000 as the case may be. 
 Non-recurring and recurring fees should be dealt with separately and should not be added 
for  the  purpose  of  crediting  one-third to  general  revenues under  this  rule.    In  the  case  of  the 
former, the limit of Rs. 5,000 prescribed in this rule should be applied in each individual case 
and in the case of the latter the limit of Rs. 2,500 should be applied with reference to the total 
recurring fees for the financial year. 
 Note 7.–The fee received by a Superintending Engineer of the Public Works Department, 
Buildings  and  Roads  Branch  for  acting  as  an  arbitrator   in   a   dispute   arising   between  

96 
[5.58] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. V] 
contractors  and  a  Local  Body  relating  to  a  contractor  shall  be  apportioned  between  the 
Government, the officer and the staff employed in that connection as follows: 
        Government                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ..35 per cent 
 Superintending Engineer                                                   ..55 per cent  
 Staff (clerical employed)                                                   ..10 per cent 
 In case no staff is employed, the fee shall be distributed as follows: 
 Government                                                                       ..40 per cent  
 Superintending Engineer                                                  ..60 per cent   
No Superintending Engineer shall, however, be allowed to draw more than Rupees five 
thousand in any one arbitration case without the prior approval of Government. 
Note  8.─Any  scholarship  or  stipend  received,  during  study  leave  or  otherwise  by  a 
Government   employee   from   a source   other   than   the   Consolidated   Fund   of   India   or 
Consolidated  Fund  of  a  State  for  the  purpose  of  prosecuting  a  course  of  studies  or  receiving 
specialised training in professional  or technical  subjects  will not be  subject to a  cut under the 
provisions of this rule.  
   However,  this  rule  will  continue  to  apply,  unless  specially  relaxed  to  the  payments 
received  by  such  Government  employees as  a  result  of  full  time  or  part-time  employment 
undertaken by them. 
   Note 9.–This rule will not apply to the income derived by a Government employee from 
exploitation  of  a  patent  for  an  invention  taken  out  by  him  with  the  permission  of  competent 
authority under rule 5.64. 
   Note 10.–This rule will not apply to the fees which Government employees may receive 
from  a  University  or  other  examining  bodies  in  return  for  their  services  as  examiners,  paper-
setters. Superintendents, Invigilators, checkers, etc.  The “examining body” covers only those 
institutions   which   are   semi-Governments,   i.e.   bodies   which   are   financed   wholly or 
substantially by Government grants/loans etc. This rule will also not apply to fees received by 
a  Government  employee  for  similar  service  from  Public  Sector  Undertakings  or  enterprises 
which are  wholly or substantially owned by Government even though they are  not examining 
bodies. 
   Note 11.–The  operation  of  this  rule  may  be  exempted,  with  the  concurrence  of  the 
Finance Department, for the income derived by a Government employee from sale or royalties 
of a book written by him with the aid of the  knowledge acquired by him during the course of 
his  service, provided  the  Administrative  Department  certifies  that  such  book  is  not  a  mere 
compilation of Government rules, regulations or procedures but reveals the author‟s scholarly 
study of the subject. 
  Note 12.–This rule will not apply to the income derived by a Government employee:– 
 (a)  from   writing   of   reports,   papers   or   study   reports   on   selected   subjects   for 
International bodies  like U.N.O.,UNESCO, etc.,; and  
 (b)  delivering  of  lectures  on  literary,  cultural,  artistic,  technological  and  scientific 
subjects including management sciences which are treated as literary pursuits. 

97 
[Chap.  V]  ADDITIONS TO PAY     [5.59-5.63] 
  5.59.  The  attesting  and  revising  officers  of  outlaying  courts  and  officers  of  the 
Revenue Department and attesting and revising officers of the Judicial Department are 
permitted  to  receive  with  the  sanction  of  the  presiding  officers  of  the  courts  and 
offices concerned one-tenth of the copying and urgent fees received in respect of the 
copies  attested  and  revised  by  them.  All  copies  prepared  at  Government  expenses 
shall, however, be examined and attested without fee. 
   5.60.  When  a  Government  employee  of  an  Educational  Service  is  permitted  to 
receive fees for private tuition, the financial limits of the powers of sanction accorded 
to by a competent authority shall be considered to apply to the total amount of fees to 
be  accepted  by  such  Government  employee  during  any  particular  scholastic  term  or 
vacation. 
          5.61. Omitted. 
   5.62. Omitted. 
   5.63. Any Government employee is eligible to receive and, except as otherwise 
provided  by  a  general  or  special  order  of  the  competent  authority,  to  retain  without 
special permission.– 
(a)  the premium awarded for any essay or plan in public competitions;  
  (b) any reward offered for the arrest of a criminal, or for information or special  
service in connection with the administration of justice; 
(c)  any   reward   payable   in   accordance   with   Regulation   or   rules   framed 
thereunder; 
(d)  any  reward sanctioned  for  services  in  connection  with  the  administration 
of the customs and excise laws; and  
  (e) any fees payable to a Government employee for duties which he is required 
to  perform  in  his  official  capacity  under  any  special  or  local  law  or  by 
order of Government. 
         Note.–A fee payable to Government employee under rule 5.63(e) can be retained by him 
without  special  permission.  In  other  words,  rule  5.58  which  requires  that  1/3rd  of  all  fees 
received  by  Government  employee  from  private  source  should  be  credited  to  Government, 
does  not  apply  to  such  remuneration.  It  is  not  considered  desirable  that  a  Government 
employee who in his official capacity, is nominated as a chairman or Member of a Government 
or  quasi-Government  body  or  governing  body  of  an  institution  which  receives  a grant  from 
Government,  should  be  made  eligible  for  any  fee  or  other  remuneration  (except  Travelling 
Allowance) which is admissible to non-Government employees for attending a meeting of the 
institution  concerned  or  for  performing  other  work  thereof.  This object  can  be  served  by 
making  a suitable provision  in  the Articles  of Association or other  Regulations of  the  body 
 

98 
[5.63-5.64]   THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. V] 
concerned  or  any  Act  relating  to  its  institution  without having  recourse  to  an  amendment  of 
rule 5.63. 
   5.64. A  Government  employee  whose  duties  involve  the  carrying  out  of 
scientific  or  technical  research  shall  not  apply  for  or  obtain,  or  cause  or  permit  any 
other  person  to  apply  for  or  obtain,  a  patent  for  an  invention  made  by  such 
Government  employee  save  with the  permission  of  the  competent  authority  and  in 
accordance with such conditions as the competent authority may impose.  
   If a question arises whether a Government employee is a Government employee 
to whom this rule applies, the decision of the competent authority shall be final. 
    Note  1.–The  Administrative  instructions  issued  by  Government  under  this  rule  are 
contained in Appendix 9 of Part II of this Volume. 
    Note  2.–The  payment  of  honoraria  as  remuneration  for  the  use  by  Government  of 
inventions  patented  by  persons  in  Government  employ  whose  duties  do  not  involve  the 
carrying out of scientific or technical research should be regulated by the provisions of section 
17 of the  Inventions and Designs Act, 1888 and section 21 of the  Indian Patents and Designs 
Act, 1911, and not by rule 5.55 or 5.64. The terms on which an invention may be used for the 
services of the Union should be settled with the approval of the Union Government before any 
payment is made to the patentee. 
 
 
 

99 
 
 
CHAPTER VI 
DEPUTATION OUT OF INDIA 
         6.1. The deputation of a Government employee out of India shall be sanctioned 
by the Administrative Department concerned for the initial period of deputation which 
may be extended upto five  years and in a rare case of special nature, if the exigencies 
so  require  in  public  interest,  such  period  may  be  extended  beyond  five  years  by  the 
Administrative  Department  concerned  with  the  prior  concurrence  of  the  Department 
of   Personnel   and   Administrative   Reforms,   in   accordance   with   the   terms   and 
conditions laid down in the Annexure to this chapter.  
         6.2.  (1)  When  a  Government  employee  is,  with  proper  sanction,  temporarily 
deputed for duty out of India either in connection with the post held by him in India or 
in connection with any special duty on which he may temporarily be  placed, he may 
be  allowed  by  the  Competent  Authority  to  draw  during  the  period  of  deputation  the 
same pay which he would have drawn had he remained on duty in India: 
         Provided  that  a  Government  employee,  who  is  placed  on  deputation  while 
already  on  leave  out  of  India  on  earned  leave  may  be  required  by  the  competent 
authority  to  continue  to  be  on  leave,  in  which  case  he  shall  be  given  during  that 
period, in addition to his leave salary, an honorarium of one-sixth of the pay which he 
would have drawn had he remained on duty in India, the cost of passage from and to 
India shall be borne by him.  
           Note.–The portion of the pay which a Government employee may be permitted to draw 
in  foreign  currency  while  on  deputation  abroad  will be  determined  in  accordance  with  the 
orders issued by the competent authority in this regard from time to time. 
         (2)  A  Government  employee  on  deputation  in  a  foreign  country  may  also  be 
granted  a  compensatory  allowance  of  such  amount  as  the competent  authority  may 
think fit. 
         (3)  The  foreign  exchange  equivalent  of  the  pay,  honorarium  or  compensatory 
allowance admissible under sub-rule (1) or sub-rule (2) shall be calculated at such rate 
of exchange as the Union Government may by order prescribe. 
 
        (4) Omitted.   
        Note  1.–A competent authority  may depute  a  subordinate  police  employee to any country  
outside  India  to  accompany  on  take  charge  of  criminals  or  lunatics,  or  any other business 
which is part of his duty as a police officer, and may grant to the officer so deputed– 
(a) full pay, for the entire period of absence from India, with;  

100 
  [6.2] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VI] 
(b)   actual   travelling   expenses,   and   a subsistence allowance   not   exceeding   the 
following scale, while in any country outside India: – 
                                                                                                             S.              d. 
For Government employees of the Inspector class                   22             6 a day 
 (including Sub-Inspector)  
           For Government employees of the Sergeant class                     
           For Government employees of the Constables and                  15             0  a day 
Assistant Sub-Inspectors Classes. 
Pakistan for the purposes of this note is treated                                    
as in India. 
           Note  2.–The High Commissioner may be authorised to act on the decision taken under 
proviso  to  sub-rule  (1).  The  periods  of  deputation,  thus,  converted  into  leave  will  count  for 
pensions as leave and not as deputation.  
           Note  3.–The  period  of  deputation  runs  from  the  date  on  which  the  Government 
employee makes over charge of his office in India to the date on which he resumes it, or, if the 
Government employee is on leave out of India at the time he is placed on deputation the period 
of the deputation is the time actually occupied by the duty. 
           Note  4.–The  term “pay”  in  the  expression  „pay  which  he  would  have  drawn  had  he 
remained on duty in India‟ occurring in this rule, should be interpreted literally with reference 
to the definition in rule 2.44 and the pay which a Government employee would have drawn if 
he  were  on duty in India  should be  determined, for the  purpose  of this rule,  with reference to 
what the competent authorities in India, state the Government employees pay would have been 
if he were on duty in India. It will, therefore, be necessary for Accountant General to intimate 
to  the High  Commissioner  in  each  case  after  consultation  with  Government,  the  pay  which  a 
Government employee would have drawn if on duty in India.  
          As  overseas  pay  is  included  in  “pay”  and  as  a  Government  employee  would  draw 
overseas pay under rule 6.2 (1) (if entitled to it) had he remained on duty in India, it should be 
taken into account for the purposes of calculation of the deputation pay under that rule. 
          In the case of Government employees who are not deputed out of India for special items 
of  works  but  are  placed  on  continuous  service  with  Commissions  and  Committees  whose 
functions require work, both in and out of India, the expression should be interpreted as having 
reference  to  the  pay  which  they  would  have  drawn  in  India  had  they  continued  on  duty  with 
the Commission or Committee there. 
           Note  5.– In the  case  of a  Government employee proceeding on deputation the  grant of 
return passage to India  is conditional  on  his return to duty  forthwith on the  conclusion of the 
deputation unless  an  arrangement  to  the  contrary  effect  is  specially  permitted  at  the  time  the 
deputation closes or is about to close, and the proposed leave is begun. 
           Note 6.  Omitted 
                                    Note  7.–For  terms  to  be  granted  to  Government  employees  sent  on  training  abroad 
under the various training schemes see Appendix 20-A to Part II of this Volume. 

101 
 
 
[Chap. VI]  DEPUTATION OUT OF INDIA [6.3] 
 
                                    6.3. When a Government employee is with proper sanction deputed for duty out 
of India to hold a regular constituted permanent or quasi permanent post, other than a 
post borne on the cadre of the service to which he belongs, his pay shall be regulated 
by the orders of the competent authority. 
 
                                              ANNEXURE 
                                             (Referred to in rule 6.1) 
     Standard terms and conditions  of  foreign  service   in  respect   of        
employees of the Punjab Government deputed to foreign countries 
       1. Period of deputation.–The period of deputation shall be for _____ year (s) in 
the  first  instance  from  the  date  the  Government  employee  joins the assignment. But 
the  period  of  foreign  assignment  may  be  extended  or  reduced  according  to  the 
requirements of the foreign employer or the State Government.   
       2. Pay,  Allowances  and  other  perks.–The  Government  employee  shall  be 
entitled  to  pay,  allowances  and  other  perks  fixed  by  the  borrowing  Government  and 
approved by the Government of India in consultation with the State Government.         
       3. Leave  salary  and  pension  contributions.–The  leave  salary  and  pension 
contributions  shall  be  paid  either  by  the  foreign  employer  or  by  the  employee 
concerned in accordance with the provisions of rule 10.9 of the Punjab Civil Services 
Rules,  Volume  I,  Part  I.  In  case  of  default,  interest  shall  be  recoverable  as  per  the 
provisions of rule 10.10 of the said rules. 
       4. General  Provident  Fund  and  Group  Insurance  Scheme.–The  Government 
employee  shall  continue  to  be  governed  by  the  rules  of  the  State  Government  as 
amended  from  time  to  time  and  shall  ensure  monthly  subscription  towards  General 
Provident Fund and Group Insurance Scheme.   
       5. Loans  and  Advances.–The  Government  employee  shall  ensure  that  monthly 
instalments on account of recovery of loans and advances outstanding against him are 
paid regularly and he shall furnish a surety bond for payment of such dues on a non-
judicial stamp paper worth Rs. 15/- or as may be required under the rules.   
       6. Disability.–The payment of leave  salary in respect of disability incurred in or 
through  the  foreign  service  even  though  the  disability  manifests  itself  after  the 
termination of foreign service, shall be paid by the foreign employer.        
       7. Medical   facilities.–The  Government  employee  shall  be  entitled  to  such 
medical  facilities  as are not inferior  to those which he would have enjoyed under the  

102 
[Annexure] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. VI] 
State Government rules and instructions as amended from time to time, if he had been 
employed in the service of State Government.  
        8. Travel.–The  cost  of  travel  from  the  place  of  posting  of  the  employee  to  the 
place of posting in the foreign country shall be borne either by the foreign employer or 
by the employee concerned as is settled at the time of proceeding on deputation.  
        9. Joining  time  pay  and  travelling  allowance,  etc.–Joining  time  pay  and 
travelling allowance (both ways) shall be borne by the foreign employer.   
       10.  Foreign  Exchange.–The  Government  employee  shall  himself  arrange  for 
foreign exchange.  
       11.  Extension  in  the  period  of  deputation.–In  case  the  foreign  Government 
requires  the  services  of  the  Government  employee  beyond  the  specified  period  of 
contract, he  shall intimate this  fact to the  Government of India  (Ministry of External 
Affairs) as soon as it comes to his notice and shall also request his foreign employer to 
take up the matter with the Government of India‟s representative in that country.  
       12. Acceptance  of  Resignation.–The  resignation  of  a  Government  employee 
shall not be accepted while he is abroad, under any circumstances.   
       13. Non-indulgence in activities prejudicial to the interest of India.–While on 
deputation  abroad, the Government employee shall not take part in any activity which 
may prove prejudicial to the interest of India or his State of domicile.   
       14. Conduct Rules.–The Government employee shall continue to be governed by 
the  Punjab  Government  Employees  (Conduct)  Rules, 1966  as  amended from  time  to 
time.  
       15. Intimation  of  Address.–After  joining  foreign  assignment,  the  Government 
employee shall communicate his office address to his parent Department as well as to 
the High Commissioner of India in that country, for future correspondence.  
       16. Residual   matters.–The  matters  not  specifically  covered here  and  other 
unclassified matters will be governed by the provisions of Chapter X of Punjab Civil 
Services Rules, Volume I, Part I and the instructions issued by the State Government 
from time to time.    

103 
CHAPTER VII 
                 DISMISSAL, REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND RESIGNATION 
CESSATION OF PAY AND ALLOWANCES ON REMOVAL OR DISMISSAL 
        7.1.  The  pay  and  allowances  of  a  Government  employee  who  is  dismissed  or 
removed from service cease from the date of such dismissal or removal. 
 ALLOWANCES DURING PERIOD OF SUSPENSION 
         7.2.  (1)  A  Government  employee  under  suspension  shall  be  entitled  to  the 
following payments, namely:– 
     (i)   in the  case  of  a  Warrant  Officer in  Civil  employ  who  is  liable  to  revert  to 
military duty, the pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled 
had he been suspended, while in military employment. 
         (ii)   in the case of any other Government employee – 
   (a)   a  subsistence  allowance  at  an  amount  equal  to  the  leave  salary  which 
the Government employee  would have drawn if he had been on leave 
on  half  pay,  and  in  addition  dearness  allowance,  if  admissible,  on the 
basis of such leave salary: 
                  Provided that where the period of suspension exceeds six months, 
the  authority  which  made  or  is  deemed  to  have  made  the  order  of 
suspension  shall  be  competent  to  vary  the  amount  of  subsistence 
allowance  for  any  period  subsequent  to  the  period of  the  first  six 
months as follows:–   
        (i) the amount of subsistence allowance may be increased by a suitable 
amount  not  exceeding  50  per  cent  of  the  subsistence  allowance 
admissible  during  the  period  of  the  first  six  months,  if, in  the 
opinion  of  the  said  authority,  the  period  of  suspension  has  been 
prolonged  for  reasons  to  be  recorded  in  writing, not  directly 
attributable to the Government employee.   
(ii) the amount of subsistence allowance may be  reduced by a  suitable 
amount,  not exceeding  50  per cent  of  the  subsistence  allowance                               
admissible  during  the  period  of  the  first  six  months,  if, in  the 
opinion  of  the  said  authority,  the  period  of  suspension  has  been 
prolonged   due   to   reasons   to   be   recorded   in   writing,   directly 
attributable to the Government employee. 
(iii) the rate of dearness allowance will be based on the increased, or as 
the  case  may  be, the decreased  amount of  subsistence  allowance 
       admissible under clauses (i) and (ii) above; 

104 
[7.2] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VII] 
 (b) any other compensatory allowances admissible from time to time on the 
basis  of  pay  of  which  the  Government  employee  was  in  receipt  on  the 
date  of  suspension  subject  to  the  fulfilment  of  other  conditions  laid 
down for the drawal of such allowances. 
(2)  No  payment  under  sub-rule  (1)  shall  be  made  unless  the  Government 
employee  furnishes  a  certificate  that  he  is  not  engaged  in  any  other  employment, 
business, profession or vocation: 
Provided  that  in  the  case  of a Government  employee  dismissed,  removed  or 
compulsorily retired from service, who is deemed to have been placed or to continue 
to  be  under  suspension  from  the  date  of  such  dismissal  or  removal  or  compulsory 
retirement and who fails to produce such a certificate for any period or periods during 
which  he  is  deemed  to  be  placed  or  to  continue  to  be  under  suspension,  he  shall  be 
entitled  to  the  subsistence  allowance  and  other  allowances  equal  to  the  amount  by 
which his earnings during such period or periods as the case may be, fall short of the 
amount  of  subsistence  allowance  and  other  allowances  that  would  otherwise  be 
admissible to him, where the subsistence and other allowances admissible to him are 
equal to or less than the amount earned by him, nothing in this proviso shall apply to 
him. 
        Note  1.–Mounted  Police  Officers  who  are  placed  under  suspension  will  cease  to  draw 
horse,  pony  or  camel  allowance,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  will  hand  over  their  mounts  to  the 
Lines Officers or the Officer-in-charge of the Mounted Police who shall be responsible for the 
feeding  and  keeping  of  such  animals  under  the  supervision  of a Group  „A‟  or  Group  „B‟ 
Government employee.  The  actual  expenditure  incurred  on  this  account  will  be  debitable  to 
Contingencies  under  the  head “Feeding  and  keeping  of  animals  of  Mounted  Police  Officers 
under suspension.”  
           The term “Mounted Police Officer” includes members of the Mounted Police as well as 
Upper Subordinates who keep mounts. 
            Note  2.–It  is  obligatory  under  this  rule  that  in  sufficient  time  before  the expiry  of  the 
first  six  months  of  suspension  the  competent  authority  should  review  each  case  in  which  the 
period of suspension is likely to exceed six months, and even if it comes to the conclusion that 
the rule is not to be altered having regard to all circumstances of the case specific orders to that 
effect are to be passed placing on record the circumstances under which the decision had to be 
taken. 
 

105 
[Chap. VII]  DISMISSAL, REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND RESIGNATION           [7.3] 
ALLOWANCES ON REINSTATEMENT  
         7.3.  (1)  When  a  Government  employee,  who  has  been  dismissed,  removed  or 
compulsorily  retired,  is  reinstated  as  a  result  of  appeal,  revision  or review,  or would 
have  been  so  reinstated  but  for  his  retirement  on  superannuation  while  under 
suspension or not, the  authority competent to order re-instatement shall consider and 
make a specific order– 
         (a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the Government employee for 
the  period  of  his  absence  from  duty  including  the  period  of suspension, 
preceding his  dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the  case may 
be; and 
        (b)  whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty. 
        (2) Where  the  authority competent to order re-instatement is  of opinion that the 
Government employee, who had been dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired, has 
been  fully  exonerated,  the  Government  employee  shall,  subject  to  the  provisions  of 
sub-rule (6), be paid his full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, 
had  he  not  been  dismissed,  removed  or  compulsorily  retired  or  suspended,  prior  to 
such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may be:  
 Provided  that  where  such  authority  is  of  opinion  that  the  termination  of  the 
proceedings instituted  against  the  Government  employee  had  been  delayed  due  to 
reasons directly attributable to the Government employee it may, after giving him an 
opportunity  to  make  representation  and  after  considering  the  representation,  if  any, 
submitted  by  him, direct,  for  reasons  to be  recorded  in  writing,  that the  Government 
employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (7), be paid for the period of such 
delay  only  such  amount  (not  being  the  whole)  of  pay  and  allowances,  as  it  may 
determine.  
         (3)  In  a  case  falling  under  sub-rule  (2),  the  period  of  absence  from  duty 
including  the  period  of  suspension  preceding  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory 
retirement,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  be  treated  as  a  period  spent  on  duty  for  all 
purposes.  
          (4) In cases other than those covered by sub-rule (2) including cases where the 
order of dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement from service is set aside by the 
authority exercising powers of appeal, revision or review solely on the ground of non-
compliance with the requirements of clause (2) of article 311 of the Constitution and 
no further inquiry is proposed to be  held, the  Government employee shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub-rules (6) and (7), be paid such amount (not being the whole) of 
pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been dismissed, 
removed  or  compulsorily  retired  or  suspended  prior  to  such dismissal, removal or  

106 
[7.3] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap. VII] 
compulsory retirement, as the case may be, as the competent authority may determine, 
after  giving  notice  to  the  Government  employee  of  the  quantum  proposed  and  after 
considering the representation, if any, submitted by him in that connection within such 
period as may be specified in the notice:  
   Provided that any payment under this sub-rule to a Government employee other 
than  a  Government  employee  who  is  governed  by  the  provisions  of  the  payment  of 
Wages  Act,  1936  (Act  4  of  1936)  shall  be  restricted  to  a  period  of three  years 
immediately preceding the date on which order for re-instatement of such Government 
employee  are  passed  by  the  authority  exercising  the  powers  of  appeal,  revision  or 
review,  or  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  retirement  on  superannuation  of such 
Government employee, as the case may be.  
        (5)    In  a  case  falling  under  sub-rule  (4),  the  period  of  absence  from  duty 
including  the  period  of  suspension  preceding  his  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory 
retirement,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  not  be treated  as  a  period  spent  on  duty,  unless 
the competent authority specifically directs that it shall be so treated for any specified 
purpose:  
         Provided that if the Government employee so  desires such authority may direct 
that the period of absence from duty including the period of suspension preceding his 
dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory  retirement,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall  be  converted 
into leave of any kind due and admissible to the Government employee.  
        Note.–The  order  of  the  competent authority  under  the  preceding  proviso  shall  be 
absolute and no sanction of the higher authority shall be necessary for the grant of– 
          (a)  extraordinary leave in excess of three months in the case of a temporary Government 
employee; and  
          (b) leave  of any  kind due  in excess of five  years in the  case of a permanent and quasi-
permanent Government employee.  
         (6) The payment of allowances under sub-rule (2) or sub-rule (4) shall be subject 
to all other conditions under which such allowances are admissible. 
        (7) The amount determined under the proviso to sub-rule (2), or under sub-rule 
(4)  shall  not  be  less  than  the  subsistence  allowance  and  other  allowances  admissible 
under rule 7.2. 
         (8)  Any  payment  made  under this  rule  to  a  Government  employee  on  his 
reinstatement,  shall  be  subject  to  adjustment  of  the  amount,  if  any,  earned  by  him 
through  an  employment  during  the  period  between  the  date  of  removal,  dismissal  or 
compulsory retirement, as the case may be,  and  the date  of reinstatement. Where the 
emoluments  admissible  under  this  rule  are  equal  to  or  less  than  the  amounts  earned 
during the employment elsewhere nothing shall be paid to the Government employee.  

107 
[Chap. VII]  DISMISSAL, REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND RESIGNATION [7.3-7.3A] 
    Note  1.–This  rule  is  absolute  and  unconditional  and  so  the  question  of  lien  does  not 
arise in the case of a Government employee who is dismissed from service and is reinstated on 
appeal, revision or review when the period of unemployment between the date of dismissal and 
reinstatement is declared by the  authority exercising the  powers of appeal,  revision or review 
as the period spent on duty.  
    Note  2.–Clause  (b)  of  sub-rule  (1)  of  this  rule  does  not  forbid  the  period  spent under 
suspension  being  treated  as  leave,  and  it  is  open  to  the  authority  exercising  the  powers  of 
appeal,  revision  or  review  to  specify  the  proportion  of  pay  and  allowances  to  be  paid  as  the 
leave salary which would be permissible, if the Government employee were on leave.  
Administrative  Instruction.–A  permanent  post  vacated  by  the  reason  of  dismissal, 
removal  or  compulsory  retirement  of  a  Government  employee  should  not  be  filled 
substantively until the expiry of a period of one year from the date of such dismissal, 
removal or compulsory retirement. Where, on the expiry of the period of one year, the 
permanent post is filled and the original incumbent of the post is reinstated thereafter, 
he  should  be  accommodated  against  any  post  which  may  be  substantively  vacant  in 
the  grade  to which his  previous  substantive  post belonged.  If there is  no such vacant 
post,  he  should  be  accommodated  against  a  supernumerary  post  which  should  be 
created  in  that  grade  with  proper  sanction  and  with  the  stipulation  that  it  would 
terminate on the occurrence of the first substantive vacancy in that grade.  
       Note  3.–If no order is passed under sub-rule (5), directing that the period of absence be 
treated as duty for any specified purpose, the period of absence should be treated as 'non-duty'. 
In  such  event,  the  past  service  (i.e.  service  rendered  before  dismissal,  removal,  compulsory 
retirement) will not be forfeited. 
                        Note  4.–There is no bar to the conversion of any portion of a period of suspension into 
extraordinary leave. In the case of persons who are not fully exonerated, the conversion of the 
period  of  suspension  into  leave  with  or  without  allowances  has  the  effect  of  removing  the 
stigma  of  suspension  and  all  the  adverse  consequences  flowing  therefrom.  The  moment  the 
period  of  suspension  is  converted  into  leave,  it  has  the  effect  of  vacating  the  order  of 
suspension, and it will be deemed not to have been passed at all. Therefore, if it is found that 
the  total  amount  of  subsistence  and  compensatory  allowances  that  an  officer  received  during 
the  period  of  suspension  exceeds  the  amount  of  leave  salary  and  allowances,  the  excess  will 
have to be refunded and there is no escape from this conclusion.  
  7.3-A.  (1)  Where  the  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory  retirement  of  a 
Government  employee  is  set  aside  by  a  court  of  law  and  such  Government 
employee  is  re-instated  without  holding  any  further  inquiry,  the  period  of 
absence  from  duty  shall  be  regularised  and  the  Government  employee  shall  be  paid 
pay  and  allowances  in accordance  with the  provisions  of sub-rule  (2) or sub-rule  (3) 
subject to the directions, if any, of the court.  

108 
[7.3A] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VII] 
   (2) (i) Where the dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement of a Government 
employee  is  set  aside  by  the  court  solely  on  the  ground  of  non-compliance  with  the 
requirements  of  article  311  of  the  Constitution,  and  where  he  is  not  exonerated  on 
merits,  the  Government  employee  shall,  subject  to  the  provisions  of  sub-rule  (7)  of 
rule  7.3,  be  paid  such  amount  (not  being  the  whole)  of  the  pay  and  allowances,  to 
which   he   would   have   been   entitled   had   he   not   been   dismissed,   removed   or 
compulsorily retired,  suspended  prior  to  such dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory 
retirement, as the case may be, as the competent authority may determine, after giving 
notice  to  the  Government  employee  of  the  quantum  proposed  and  after  considering 
the  representation, if any, submitted  by him in that connection within such period as 
may be specified in the notice : 
          Provided that any payment made under this sub-rule to a Government employee 
other than a Government employee who is governed by the provisions of the Payment 
of  Wages  Act,  1936  (Act  4  of  1936)  shall  be  restricted  to  a  period  of  three  years 
immediately preceding the date on which the judgment of the court was passed or the 
date of retirement on superannuation of such Government employee, as the case may 
be. 
         (ii)  The  period  intervening  the  date  of  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory 
retirement  including  the  period  of  suspension  preceding  such  dismissal,  removal  or 
compulsory retirement, as the case may be, and the date of judgment of the court shall 
be regularised in accordance with the provisions contained in sub-rule (5) of rule 7.3. 
          (3)  If  the  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory  retirement  of  a  Government 
employee is set aside by the court on the merits of the case, the period intervening the 
date   of   dismissal,   removal   or   compulsory   retirement   including   the   period   of 
suspension  preceding  such  dismissal,  removal  or  compulsory  retirement,  as  the  case 
may be, and the date of reinstatement shall be treated as spent on duty for all purposes 
and  he  shall be  paid full pay and  allowances  for that period to which  he  would have 
been  entitled,  had  he  not  been  dismissed,  removed  or  compulsorily  retired  or 
suspended prior to such dismissal, removal or compulsory retirement, as the case may 
be.  
          (4)  The  payment  of  allowances  under  sub-rule  (2)  or  sub-rule  (3)  shall  be 
subject to all other conditions under which such allowances are admissible.  
          (5)  Any  payment  made  under  this  rule  to  a  Government  employee  on  his 
reinstatement  shall  be  subject  to  adjustment  of  the  amount,  if  any,  earned  by  him 
through  an  employment  during  the  period  between  the  date  of  dismissal,  removal  or 
compulsory   retirement   and   the   date   of   reinstatement.   Where   the   emoluments 
admissible   under   this   rule   are   equal   to   or   less   than   those   earned   during   the 
employment elsewhere nothing shall be paid to the Government employee. 

109 
[Chap. VII]  DISMISSAL, REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND RESIGNATION       [7.3-B] 
         7.3-B. (1) When a Government employee who has been suspended is reinstated 
or  would  have been  so  re-instated  but  for  his  retirement  on  superannuation  while 
under  suspension  the  authority  competent  to  order  re-instatement  shall  consider  and 
make a specific order – 
      (a)  regarding the pay and allowance to be paid to the Government employee for 
the  period  of  suspension  ending  with  re-instatement  or  the  date  of  his 
retirement on superannuation, as the case may be; and  
         (b)   whether or not the said period shall be treated as a period spent on duty. 
         (2)  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  rule  7.3  or  rule  7.3-A,  where  a 
Government   employee   under   suspension   dies   before   the   disciplinary   or   court 
proceedings  instituted  against  him,  are  concluded,  the  period  between  the  date  of 
suspension and the date of death shall be treated as spent on duty for all purposes and 
his family shall be paid the full pay and allowances for that period to which he would 
have  been  entitled,  had  he  not  been  suspended,  subject  to  adjustment  in  respect  of 
subsistence allowance already paid. 
        (3) Where  the  authority competent to order re-instatement is  of opinion that the 
suspension  was  wholly  unjustified,  the  Government  employee  shall,  subject  to  the 
provisions of sub-rule (8), be paid the full pay and allowances to which he would have 
been entitled, had he not been suspended: 
         Provided  that  where  such  authority  is  of  opinion  that  the  termination  of  the 
proceedings  instituted  against  the  Government  employee,  had  been  delayed  due  to 
reasons directly attributable to the Government employee, it may, after giving him an 
opportunity to make his representation and after considering the representation, if any, 
submitted  by  him,  direct,  for  reasons  to be  recorded  in  writing,  that the  Government 
employee shall be paid for the period of such delay only such amount (not being the 
whole) of such pay and allowances as it may determine. 
          (4)  In a case falling under sub-rule (3), the period of suspension shall be treated 
as a period spent on duty for all purposes. 
          (5) In cases other than those falling under sub-rules (2) and (3), the Government 
employee shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rules (8) and (9), be paid such amount 
(not being the whole) of the pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, 
had  he  not  been  suspended,  as  the  competent  authority  may  determine,  after  giving 
notice  to  the  Government  employee  of  the  quantum  proposed  and  after  considering 
the  representation, if any, submitted  by him in that connection within such period as 
may be specified in the notice. 
          (6)  Where  suspension  is  revoked  pending  finalisation  of  the  disciplinary            
or court proceedings, any order passed under sub-rule (1) before the conclusion of  the  

110 
[7.3-B] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VII] 
proceedings  against  the  Government  employee  shall  be  reviewed  on  its  own  motion 
after the conclusion of the proceedings by the authority mentioned in sub-rule (1) who 
shall make an order according to the provisions of sub-rule (3) or sub-rule (5), as the 
case may be. 
          (7)  In  a  case  falling  under  sub-rule  (5),  the  period  of  suspension  shall  not  be 
treated  as  a  period  spent  on  duty  unless  the  competent  authority  specifically  directs 
that it shall be so treated for any specified purpose: 
           Provided that if the Government employee so desires such authority may order 
that  the  period  of  suspension  shall  be  converted  into  leave  of  any  kind  due  and 
admissible to the Government employee. 
        Note.–The order of the competent authority under the preceding proviso shall be absolute 
and no sanction of the higher authority shall be necessary for the grant of– 
        (a)  extraordinary leave  in excess of three  months in the  case  of temporary Government 
employee; and 
          (b) leave  of  any  kind  in  excess  of  five years  in  the case of permanent Government  
                employee. 
       (8)  The  payment  of  allowances  under  sub-rule  (2),  sub-rule  (3)  or  sub-rule (5) 
shall be subject to all other conditions under which such allowances are admissible. 
       (9) The amount determined under the proviso to sub-rule (3) or under sub-rule (5) 
shall not be less than the subsistence allowance and other allowances admissible under 
rule 7.2. 
         Note  1.–A  suspended  Mounted  Police  Officer  on  reinstatement,  even  if  such  Officer  is 
found not guilty of charges preferred against him, will not be given conveyance allowance for 
the period of suspension. 
         Note  2.–The  period  spent  under  medical  treatment  by  a  Government  employee  under 
suspension,  shall  be  treated  as  spent  under  suspension  and  the  subsistence  allowance  as 
admissible under the rules shall be given for that period. On reinstatement, it shall be specified 
whether  it  is  to  be  treated  as  'duty'  or  'non-duty'  with  reference  to  the  provisions  of  this  rule, 
unless the Government employee concerned desires and the competent authority orders that it 
may be converted into leave of the kind due and admissible to him. 
         Note  3.–Extra  post is not required to be created for grant of  full pay and allowances on 
reinstatement of a suspended employee after his having been fully exonerated. 
        Note 4.–Also see Note 4 under rule 7.3(8). 

111 
[Chap. VII]   DISMISSAL, REMOVAL, SUSPENSION AND RESIGNATION  [7.4-7.5] 
   LEAVE TO A GOVERNMENT' EMPLOYEE UNDER SUSPENSION 
       7.4. Leave may not be granted to a Government employee under suspension. See 
also note 2 under rule 7.3. 
                                      Note  1.–A suspension  vacancy  should  be  treated  as  filled  by  a  reservist,  if  one  is 
available at the time, a Government employee belonging to an establishment containing a leave 
reserve is placed under suspension. If no reservist is available at the time, an outsider may be 
appointed but replaced by a reservist as soon as one is available.  
        Note 2.–In an establishment where provision for leave reserve exists, any vacancy caused 
on account of suspension of a Government employee should be filled by a 'reservist' and where 
a 'reservist'  is  not  available, the  post  should  be  filled  by  an  officiating  appointment.  It  is, 
however, not necessary to create an extra post. 
                              FORFEITURE OF SERVICE ON RESIGNATION 
        7.5. (1) Resignation from a service or a post, unless it is allowed to be withdrawn 
in public interest by the appointing authority, entails forfeiture of past service. 
         (2)  A  resignation  shall  not  entail  forfeiture  of  past  service  if  it  has  been 
submitted   to   take   up,   with   proper   permission,   another   appointment,   whether 
temporary or permanent, under the Government where service qualifies for pension. 
         (3)  Interruption  in  service  in  a  case  falling  under  sub-rule  (2),  due  to  the  two 
appointments  being  at  different  stations,  not  exceeding  the  joining  time  permissible 
under the  rules of transfer, shall be  covered  by grant of leave  of any kind due  to the 
Government employee on the date of relief or by formal condonation to the extent to 
which the period is not covered by leave due to him. 
         (4) The appointing authority may permit a person to withdraw his resignation in 
public interest on the following conditions, namely:– 
         (i)  that  the  resignation  was  tendered  by  the  Government  employee  for  some 
compelling reasons which did not involve any reflection on his integrity, efficiency or 
conduct and the request for withdrawal of the resignation has been made as a result of 
a  material change  in the  circumstances which  originally compelled  him to tender the 
resignation; 
         (ii)  that during the period intervening between the date on which the resignation 
became  effective  and  the  date  from  which  the  request  for  withdrawal  was  made,  the 
conduct of the person concerned was in no way improper; 
         (iii) that  the  period  of  absence  from  duty  between  the  date  on  which  the 
resignation  became  effective  and  the  date  on  which  the  person  is  allowed  to resume 
duty  as  a  result  of  permission  to  withdraw  the  resignation  is  not  more  than  ninety 
days; 

112 
 [7.5] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VII] 
          (iv)  that  the  aforementioned  period  of  ninety  days  shall  be  observed  in  the 
manner  that  the  employee  concerned  should  put  in  his  application  for  withdrawal  of 
resignation within two months of being relieved and the same should as far as possible 
be processed within a period of one month; and  
          (v)  that  the  post,  which  was  vacated  by  the  Government  employee  on  the 
acceptance of his resignation or any other comparable post, is available. 
          (5)  Request  for  withdrawal  of  a  resignation  shall  not  be  accepted  by  the 
appointing authority where a Government employee resigns his service or post with a 
view to taking up an appointment in or under a private commercial company or in or 
under a  corporation  or  company  wholly  or  substantially  owned  or  controlled  by  the 
Government or in or under a body controlled or financed by the Government. 
(6)  When  an  order  is  passed  by  the  appointing  authority  allowing  a  person  to 
withdraw his resignation and to resume duty, the order shall be deemed to include the 
condonation of interruption in service but the period of interruption shall not count as 
qualifying service.                                                        
                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

113 
                                                       CHAPTER VIII 
LEAVE 
SECTION I–General Conditions And Extent of Application 
I.– SERVICE COUNTING FOR LEAVE 
          8.1. Leave is earned by duty only. For the purpose of this rule, a period spent in 
foreign service counts as duty if contribution towards leave salary is paid on account of 
such period. 
         Note.–See also note below rule 2.16 (b). 
         8.2.   (a)   If   a   Government   employee,   who   quits   the   public   service   on 
compensation  or  invalid pension  or  gratuity,  is  re-employed,  and  if  his  gratuity  is 
thereupon  refunded  or  his  pension  is  held  only  in  abeyance,  his  past  service  thereby 
becoming pensionable on ultimate retirement, he may, at the discretion of the authority 
sanctioning the re-employment and to such extent as that authority may decide, count 
his former service towards leave. 
           Note.–Resignation  of  the  public  service, even  though  it  is  followed  immediately  by      
re-employment should entail  forfeiture  of past service  for the  purpose  of leave  under the rules 
in this chapter and should, therefore, constitute an „Interruption of duty‟. 
                     (b) A  Government  employee  who  is  dismissed  or  removed  from  the  public 
service,  but is  reinstated  on  appeal  or  revision,  is entitled  to  count  his  former  service 
for leave. 
           Note.–The  re-employment  of  a  person  who  has  retired  on a superannuation  or  retiring 
pension   is   generally   an   exceptional   and   temporary   expedient.   The   service   of   such   a                 
re-employed  pensioner  should,  therefore,  be  regarded  as  temporary  and  his  leave  during  the 
period of re-employment, should be regulated by the rules applicable to temporary Government 
employees. 
                         II.–APPLICATION FOR AND GRANT OF LEAVE 
                                                   (1)    GENERAL 
          8.3.  Subject to  any  instructions  issued by  the  Comptroller  and  Auditor-General 
of  India  in  order  to  secure  efficiency  and  uniformity  of  audit  in  relation  to  leave 
procedure  the following rules govern the  procedure  for making applications for leave 
and for granting leave. 
        Note.–The  instructions  relating  to  leave  procedure  are  contained  in Appendix  11 in      
Part II of this Volume. 

114 
[8.4-8.13] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
(2)  APPLICATION FOR LEAVE. 
    (a) To whom to be submitted. 
         8.4.  An  application  for  leave,  or  for  an  extension  of leave,  shall be  made  to  the 
authority competent to grant such leave or extension. 
           Note.–Application for leave should be made on form Punjab C.S.R. No. 2. 
         8.5.  A  Government  employee  on  foreign  service  in  India  should  submit  all 
applications for leave, through his employer, to the authority competent to sanction the 
leave. 
                          (b) Procedure in case of leave on medical certificate. 
                              Instructions for Medical Officers 
          8.6.  Medical  Officers  must  not  recommend  the  grant  of  leave  in  any  case  in 
which  there  appears  to  be  no reasonable  prospect  that  the  Government  employee 
concerned  will  ever  be  fit  to  resume  his  duties.  In  such  cases,  the  opinion  that  the 
Government   employee   is   permanently   unfit   for   Government   service   should   be 
recorded in the medical certificate. 
          8.7.  Every  certificate  of  a  medical  committee  or  board  or  a  medical  officer 
recommending  the  grant  of  leave  to  a  Government  employee  must  contain  a  proviso 
that  no  recommendation  contained  in  it shall be  evidence  of a  claim  to  any  leave  not 
admissible to the Government employee under the terms of his contract or of the rules 
to which he is subject. 
         8.8 to 812. Omitted. 
  Medical certificate for Government employees. 
         8.13. (a) Every application for leave on medical grounds made by a Government 
employee shall be accompanied by a medical certificate given by a registered medical 
practitioner  having  a  graduate  degree  in  the  Allopathic,  Ayurvedic  or  Homoeopathic 
system of medicine defining as nearly as possible the nature and probable duration of 
the  illness  or  by  a  request for  the  issue  of  a  requisition  for  examination by  a  medical 
officer of the Government: 
         Provided  that  the  authority  competent  to  sanction  leave  may,  at  its  discretion, 
waive  the  condition  of  producing  a  medical certificate  in  the  case  of  a Group „A‟ or 
Group „B‟ Government employee if the leave applied for does not exceed three days at 
a time and such leave shall not be treated as leave on medical certificate and shall be 
debited against leave due other than the leave on medical grounds. 
         (b)  The  authority  competent  to  sanction  leave  may  at  its  discretion,  secure  a 
second medical opinion by requesting the Principal Medical Officer or Assistant to the  

115 
[Chap. VIII]  LEAVE              [8.13] 
Civil Surgeon to have  the  applicant examined.    If it decides to do so,  it must arrange 
for  the  second  examination  to  be  made  at  the  earliest  possible  date  after  the  date  on 
which the first medical opinion was given. 
          (c) The Principal Medical Officer or Assistant to the Civil Surgeon shall express 
his opinion both as regards the facts of the illness and as regards the necessity for the 
amount of leave recommended,  and for this purpose he may require the applicant for 
leave to appear either before himself or before a medical officer nominated by him. 
         Note  1.–The  possession  of  a  certificate  as  prescribed  in this  rule  does  not itself 
confer upon the Government employee concerned any right to leave. 
         Note 2.–Omitted. 
         Note 3.–Omitted. 
         Note  4.–The Government  employee  should  obtain  a  medical  certificate  in  the 
following form or as nearly in that form as the circumstances may permit:– 
“Medical Certificate for Government employees recommended for leave, extension of 
leave or commutation of leave.” 
(1)  Name  (to  be  filled  in  by  the  applicant  in  the  presence  of the registered 
medical practitioner having a graduate degree in the Allopathic, Ayurvedic or 
Homoeopathic System of Medicine. 
(2)  Appointment. 
(3)  Age. 
(4)  Signature of the applicant. 
(5)  Total service. 
(6)  Previous period of leave or of absence on medical certificate. 
  (Columns  5  and  6  to  be  filled  in  by  the  applicant  in  the  presence  of  the 
registered  medical  practitioner  having  a  graduate  degree  in  the  Allopathic, 
Ayurvedic or Homoeopathic System of Medicine.) 
 I  ___________________________,after  careful  personal  examination  of  the 
case  hereby  certify  that  ___________________whose  signature  and  particulars  are 
given  above,  is  suffering  from  _______________and  I  consider  that  a  period  of 
absence   from   duty   of   ________________with   effect   from   ______________   is 
absolutely necessary for the restoration of his health. 
Dated the                                             Government Medical Attendant OR        
                                                            Registered Medical Practitioner having a                                                                             
                                                            Graduate Degree in the Allopathic, Ayurvedic or 
                                                            Homoeopathic System of Medicine. 

116 
[8.13-8.17] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
 
             (Second medical opinion if called for by the authority competent to sanction leave).                                   
                          
                                                                    Principal Medical Officer or 
                                                                 Assistant to Civil Surgeon 
          8.14.  In  support  of  an  application  for  leave,  or  for  an  extension  of  leave,  on 
medical certificate, from a Government employee in Group „D‟ Service, the authority 
competent to grant the leave may accept such certificate as it may deem sufficient. 
   (3) GRANT OF LEAVE 
(a)  General 
         8.15.  Leave  cannot  be  claimed  as  of  right.  When  the  exigencies  of  the  public 
services so require, discretion to refuse or revoke leave of any description is reserved 
to the authority empowered to grant it. 
The  nature  of  leave  due  and  applied  for  by  a  Government  employee  cannot  be 
altered at the option of the sanctioning authority. So, while it is open to the sanctioning 
authority to refuse or revoke leave due and applied for under this rule it is not open to 
him to alter the nature of such leave. 
          8.16.  (1)  The  grant  of  a  certificate  under  rule  8.13  or  8.14  does  not  in  itself 
confer  upon  the  Government  employee  concerned  any  right  to  leave.  The  certificate 
should  be  forwarded  to  the  authority  competent  to  grant  the  leave,  and  the  orders  of 
that authority should be  awaited. A Government employee who absents  himself from 
his  duty  without  permission  of  the  competent  authority  is  liable  to  have  his  absence 
treated as absence from duty without leave. 
          (2)    The  authority  competent  to  grant  leave  may,  in  its  discretion  waive  the 
production of a medical certificate in case of an application for leave for a period not 
exceeding  three  days  at  a  time.  Such  leave  shall  not, however,  be  treated  as leave  on 
medical  certificate  and  shall  be  debited  against  leave  other  than  leave  on  medical 
grounds. 
          8.17.  In  cases  where  all  applications  for  leave  cannot,  in  the  interests  of the 
public  service,  be  granted,  an  authority  competent  to  grant  leave  should,  in  deciding 
which application should be granted, take into account following considerations:‒ 
   (a)  The Government employees who can, for the time being, best be spared. 
(b)  The amount of leave due to the various applicants. 
(c) The amount and character of the service rendered by each applicant since he 
last returned from leave. 
 

117 
[Chap. VIII]  LEAVE     [8.17-8.20] 
 (d) The  fact  that  any  such  applicant  was  compulsorily recalled  from  his  last 
leave. 
 (e)  The  fact  that  any  such  applicant  has  been  refused  leave  in  the  public 
interest. 
          8.18.  When  a  medical  committee  or  board  has  reported  that  there  is  no 
reasonable prospect that a particular Government employee will ever be fit to return to 
duty, leave should not necessarily be refused to such a Government employee. It may 
be granted, if due, by a competent authority on the following conditions:– 
(a)   If the  medical committee or board is  unable  to say with certainty that the 
Government  employee  will  never  again  be  fit  for  service,  leave  not 
exceeding twelve months in all may be granted. Such leave should not be 
extended without further reference to a medical committee or board. 
(b)    If  the  medical committee  or  board  declares  the  Government  employee  to 
be completely and permanently incapacitated for further service he should, 
except  as  provided  in  clause  (c)  below,  be  invalided  from  the  service, 
either  on  the  expiration  of  the  leave  already  granted  to  him,  if  he  is on 
leave when examined by the committee or board, or, if he is on duty from 
the date of relief of his duties which should be arranged without delay on 
receipt of the report of the medical authority. 
(c)    A  Government  employee  declared  by  a  Committee  or Board  to  be 
completely   and   permanently   incapacitated   may,   in   special   cases,   be 
granted  leave,  or  an  extension  of  leave,  not  exceeding  six  months  as 
debited  against  the  leave  account  if  such  leave  be  due  to  him.  Special 
circumstances  justifying  such  treatment  may  be  held  to  exist  when  the 
Government  employee‟s  breakdown  in  health  has  been  caused  in  and by 
Government service, or when he has taken a comparatively small amount 
of leave during his service or will complete at an early date an additional 
year‟s service for pension. 
          8.19. Leave shall not be granted to a Government employee whom a competent 
authority  has  decided  to  dismiss,  remove  or  compulsorily  retire  from  Government 
service. 
          8.20.   Leave   should   be   sanctioned   to a   Government   employee after   due 
verification by the authority maintaining the leave account and a modified sanction for 
the period of leave can be issued, where necessary.  
          Note.–In  the  case  of  leave  preparatory  to  retirement, an  undertaking  for  recovery  of 
leave salary, if any, paid in excess shall be taken from the Government employee. 
 

118 
[8.21] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
 (b) Leave beyond the date of retirement and encashment of leave 
          8.21. (a)  Leave  at  the  credit  of  a  Government  employee  in  his  leave  account 
shall lapse on the date of his retirement: 
        Provided that the Government employee, –   
       (A) retiring on superannuation; or 
                  (B) retiring prematurely, voluntarily or on invalidation; or  
       (C) retiring compulsorily as a measure of punishment and in whose case cut 
in  the  amount  of  pension  has  not  been  ordered  by  the  competent 
authority;  
shall, subject to the  provisions  of sub-rule  (c), be  entitled to cash  payment 
in lieu of the un-utilised earned leave due as leave preparatory to retirement 
as under :– 
                  (i)  the  cash  payment  shall  be  equivalent  to  leave  salary  limited  to  a   
                        maximum of 300 days‟ earned leave; 
                  (ii)  the  cash  payment  shall  become  payable  on  retirement in the above    
                         cases in lump sum as a one-time settlement; 
                 (iii)  the  leave  salary  for  the  purpose  of  this  rule  shall  not  include city  
                         compensatory allowance or house-rent allowance; and 
                (iv)  no deduction on account of pension and pensionary benefit equivalent           
                        to other retirement benefits shall be made from the cash  thus paid.   
          (aa) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (a), the authority competent 
to grant  leave  may  withhold  whole  or  part  of  cash equivalent  of  earned  leave  in  the 
case  of  Government  employee, who  retires  from  service  on  superannuation  while 
under  suspension  or  while  disciplinary  or  criminal  proceedings  are  pending  against 
him, if in the opinion of such authority, there is a possibility of some money becoming 
recoverable from him on conclusion of the proceedings against him and on conclusion 
of the proceedings, he shall become eligible to the amount so withheld after adjustment 
of Government dues, if any. 
         (b)  In case of a Government employee, who is granted extension in Service, on 
the  completion  of  his  extended  period  of  Service, shall  be  entitled  to  draw  cash 
equivalent to un-utilized earned leave at his credit on the date of his superannuation: 
           Provided  that  a Government  employee,  who  continues  in  Service  after  his 
superannuation,  shall  earn  leave  at  the  rate  applicable  to  him  on  the  date  of  his 
superannuation: 
 Provided  further  that if a Government employee, avails earned leave in excess  

119 
[Chap. VIII]                 LEAVE         [8.21-8.22] 
of leave earned  by  him  during  the  period  of  his extension, in that case the excess leave 
availed  by  him,  shall  be  deducted  from  the  un-utilized  leave  at  his  credit  on  the  date  of  his 
superannuation. 
                  (c) the cash payment for the unutilised leave admissible under the aforesaid sub-
rule (a), shall be calculated as follows, namely: – 
 
Pay admissible on the 
date of retirement plus 
Dearness Allowance 
admissible on that date. 
___________________       
              30 
 
     
× 
   Number  of  days  of  unutilised 
earned  leave  at  credit  on  the 
date  of  retirement  subject  to  a 
maximum of 300 days. 
          (d)  Omitted. 
         Note  1.–In  the  case  of  the  person  re-employed  after  retirement  the provisions  of  these 
rules  shall  apply  as  if  he  had  entered  Government  service  for  the  first  time  on  the  date  of  his  
re-employment. 
           Note 2.  Omitted. 
           Note 3.  Omitted. 
           Note  4.–The  period of 300 days  mentioned  in  this rule includes any period of  vacation 
with which leave is combined.  
           Note 5.–Omitted. 
                  Note  6.–In  the  case  of  a  Government  employee, who  is  serving  in  a  vacation 
department, the provisions of rule 8.117 shall also apply for computing his leave under 
sub-rule (b), of this rule. 
           Note  7.–The  authorities  empowered  to  grant  earned leave,  as  specified  in  Appendix-12 
of  Part  II  of  this  Volume,  shall  be  competent  to  sanction  cash equivalent of unutilized  earned 
leave admissible under the provisions of this rule. 
                            (c)   Encashment of earned  leave  along  with 
                                   Leave Travel Concession while in service 
          8.22. (1) A Government employee may be permitted to encash earned leave upto 
ten days at the time of availing of Leave Travel Concession while in service, subject to 
the  condition  that  the  total  earned  leave  so  encashed  during  the  entire  service  career 
shall not exceed sixty days in the aggregate. 
          (2) The  encashment of  earned  leave  under  this  rule  shall  be  allowed  only  once 
during the relevant block of four years and shall be admissible without any linkage to 
the number of days and the nature of leave availed for Leave Travel Concession. 

120 
 [8.22-8.23] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
  (3) The amount of leave encashment shall be calculated as follows, namely: – 
 
Pay admissible on the date of 
availing of the Leave Travel 
Concession plus Dearness 
Allowance admissible on that 
date. 
_______________________ 
              30 
 
 
 
× 
Number of days of earned 
leave encashed subject to the 
maximum of ten days at one 
time. 
          (4)  The leave encashed under this rule shall be debitable to the leave account of 
the Government employee. 
          (5)  Where  both  husband  and  wife  are  Government  employees,  encashment  of 
leave shall be admissible to both of them subject to a maximum of sixty days for each 
spouse during the entire service career. 
          (6) The leave  so  encashed  shall not be  deducted from the  maximum amount of 
earned leave encashable at the time of retirement under rule 8.21. 
                             Clarification:–Encashment   of   earned   leave   under   this   rule   shall   not   be 
admissible for availing Leave Travel Concession to visit Home Town.               
 (4)  AUTHORITIES COMPETENT TO GRANT LEAVE 
          8.23.  Appendix  12  in  Part  II  of  this  Volume  specifies  the  authorities  by  whom 
leave  admissible  under  these  rules,  other  than  leave  on  medical  certificate  under  rule 
8.18, special disability leave under rule 8.124 and 8.125, study leave under rule 8.126 
and extraordinary leave under rule 8.137 of these rules, may be granted: 
           Provided that the authorities specified in Appendix 12, in Part II of this Volume 
may further delegate their powers to grant leave to any authority subordinate to them 
subject to such conditions and limitations as they may deem fit to impose: 
            Provided further that: 
(a)   the creation of an additional post requiring the sanction of a higher    
       authority; or 
(b)   reference  to  higher  authority  for  a  substitute;  the  sanction  of  the  higher 
authority competent to create the additional post or to sanction a substitute 
will be necessary. Special disability leave can be sanctioned only with the 
consent of the Department of Finance.          
          8.24. Omitted. 
 

121 
[Chap. VIII]  LEAVE [8.25-8.28] 
III.–COMMENCEMENT AND EXPIRY OF LEAVE AND COMBINATION OF 
HOLIDAYS WITH LEAVE 
                          (1) Commencement and expiry of leave. 
          8.25. Leave ordinarily begins on the day on which transfer of charge is effected 
and ends on the day preceding that on which charge is resumed. When joining time is 
allowed  to a  Government employee returning from leave  out of India,  the  last day of 
his leave is the day before the arrival of the vessel in which he returns at her moorings 
or anchorage  in the port of debarkation, or, if he returns  by air, the  day on which the 
aircraft in which he returns arrives at its first regular port in India. 
                          (2)  Combination of holidays with leave. 
           8.26.  An  authority  competent  to  grant  leave  may  permit  Sundays,  other 
recognised holidays or vacation to be prefixed to leave or affixed to leave or to be both 
prefixed and affixed to leave in the circumstances and on the conditions laid down in 
rules 8.27 to 8.32: 
Provided  that  prefixing  and  suffixing  Sundays  or  other holidays  to  leave,  other 
than leave on medical certificate, shall be allowed automatically except in cases where 
for  administrative  reasons,  permission  for  prefixing  and  suffixing  Sundays  or  other 
holidays to leave is specifically withheld. In case of leave on medical certificate if the 
day on which an employee is certified medically fit for rejoining duties happens to be 
Sunday or other holiday, he shall automatically be allowed to suffix such a holiday to 
his medical leave and such day shall not be counted as leave. 
         Note.–See also rules 3.23 and 3.24. 
         8.27. When the day (or days) immediately preceding the day on which the leave 
of a Government  employee  begins  is a holiday (or series of holidays), and competent 
authority has permitted under rule  3.23, the said Government employee to make over 
charge  (and  the  Government  employee  relieving  him  to  receive  charge)  on  the 
afternoon of the day immediately preceding the holiday or series of holidays, the leave 
of  the  Government employee  making  over  charge  and  any  consequent  rearrangement 
of  pay  and  allowances  shall,  unless  the  competent  authority  in  any  case  otherwise, 
directs, take effect from the first day after the holidays. 
          8.28. When the day (or days) immediately following the day on which the leave 
of a Government employee ends is a holiday (or series  of holidays), and a competent 
authority  has  permitted  the  said  Government  employee  to  receive  charge  (and  the 
Government  employee  relieved  to  make  over  charge)  on  the forenoon  if  the  day 
immediately following the holidays or series of holidays, the leave if the Government 
employee  receiving  charge,  is,  unless  the  competent  authority  in  any  case  otherwise 
directs, treated  as  having  terminated  on,  and any consequent re-arrangement  of pay  

122 
[8.28-8.30] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
and allowances  takes  effect  from  the  day  on  which  the  leave  would  have  ended  if 
holidays had not been affixed. 
         Note  1.–When  a  competent  authority directs  otherwise  than  as  in  this  rule,  it  should 
convey the orders in the following form:  
        “It is directed under Rule 8.28 that___ (leave) be treated as having terminated on ____and 
the consequent re-arrangement of pay and allowances takes effect from the same date.”    
           Note  2.–The  fundamental  principle  is  that  two  Government  employees  cannot  be on 
duty in the same post. Under rule 
8.27
8.28
 a competent authority cannot accordingly direct that both 
the  relieving  and  the  relieved  Government  employees  shall  be  considered  as  on  duty  in  the 
same  post  during  the  period  of  holidays.  A  competent  authority  can  under  the  rule  direct that 
the  leave  of  the  Government  employee 
proceeding on
returning from 
 leave  and  the  consequent  arrangement  of 
pay  and  allowances  shall  take  effect  from  the  first  day 
after
before
 the  holidays  or  from  some  day 
during  the  holidays.  If  a  holiday  comes  at  the 
beginning
end
 of  leave  the  Government  employee 
going on
returning from
 leave can be allowed under rule 
8.27
8.28
 during that holiday, where ordinarily no work 
is required of him to 
go
remain
 off and count the holiday as duty, as if would have counted had he 
not been going on leave
returning to duty before holiday 
.The Government employee
going on
returning from
 leave 
does not then make over till the holiday is over
then takes over before the holiday commences
.   If   a   competent   authority   decides   that   in   the 
circumstances  of  the  case  some  one  must  be  on  the  spot  in  charge  than either (1)  the 
Government    employee 
going on
returning from
 leave    must 
remian 
return
 during    the    holiday    or    (2) 
the relieving Government employee
the Government employee to be relieved
must  
be appointed to
retain
 the charge during the whole or part of the  
holidays according to the orders  and  he  must do the work without drawing the pay of the post, 
the 
outgoing
incoming
 man  being  allowed  to  be  away  from  the  station  though  being  treated  as  on  duty 
during the whole or part of the holidays. 
          8.29.  In  the  case  of  Government  employees  serving  in  vacation Departments, 
vacations may be prefixed or affixed to leave, or both prefixed and affixed or allowed 
to intervene between two periods of leave subject to the conditions mentioned in rules 
3.23,  3.24,  8.27,  8.28,  and  8.117(c). The  previous  approval  of  the  Department  of 
Finance  should  be  obtained  in  cases  where  combination  of  vacation  with  leave 
involves extra expense to Government. 
          Note.–Recognised holidays intervening between leave and vacation or vice versa should, 
be treated as part of the vacation and such holidays should be taken into account for the purpose 
of calculating the  maximum amount of earned leave  admissible  to a  Government employee at 
any one time. 
          8.30. When a Government employee is permitted to prefix vacation to leave; he 
will  report  before  leaving  headquarters  or  if  for  urgent  reasons,  the  leave  is  granted 
during vacation as soon as it is granted, that he makes over charge with effect from the  

123 
[Chap. VIII]  LEAVE [8.30-8.33] 
end of  the  vacation,  and  the  relieving  Government  employee  will  then  take  over 
charge, and the leave and any consequent re-arrangement of pay will have effect from 
the end of the vacation. 
          8.31. When  a  Government  employee  is  permitted  to  affix  vacation  to leave  the 
Government  employee  to  be  relieved  will  make  over  charge  before  the  vacation,  and 
any  consequent  re-arrangement  of  pay  will  have  effect  from  the  beginning  of  the 
vacation. 
          8.32.  In  the  case  of  District  and  Sessions  Judges,  vacations  will  be  treated  as 
recognised  holidays  and  may  be  prefixed  or  affixed  to  leave  or  both  prefixed  and 
affixed or allowed to intervene between two periods of leave subject to the conditions 
mentioned in Rules 8.23, 8.27 and 8.28 above and provided further that – 
(i) no additional expense is incurred by the State for the period of the vacation. 
(ii)   vacation shall be reckoned as leave in calculating the maximum amount of 
“earned leave” which may be included in the particular period of leave. 
        Exception: As  it  is  not  possible  to  say  at  the  time  of  sanctioning  leave that 
condition  (i)  will  necessarily  be satisfied,  any  permission  to  combine  leave  with 
vacation is  subject  to  withdrawal  in  the  event  of  a  Government  employee  being 
required  to  carry  out  the  duties  of  the  post  during  vacation.  In  such  cases  either  the 
Government employee will be recalled or, if this is impracticable owing to his absence 
from  India  or  for  any  other  reason,  a substitute will be  appointed.    In  the  latter  case, 
the  portion  of  the  Government  employee‟s  vacation  during  which  the  substitute 
discharges the duties of the post will be treated as leave. 
         8.33.  (1)  Where  the  application  of  the  above  rules  as  to  prefixing  and  affixing 
holidays to leave or joining time is doubtful, or inequitable, a competent authority will 
decide which Government employee shall be held to have been incharge, and to which 
the pay of the post for the holiday or holidays shall be paid.         
        (2)  Unless the authority competent to grant leave in any case, otherwise directs,–   
  (a)  if  holidays  are  prefixed to  leave,  the  leave  and  any  consequent                  
re-arrangement of pay and allowances takes effect from the day after the 
holidays; and 
  (b)  if holidays are suffixed to leave, the leave is treated as having terminated 
and  any  consequent  re-arrangement  of  pay  and  allowances  take  effect 
from  the  day  on which  the  leave  would  have  ended,  if  holidays  had  not 
been suffixed. 
                 IV.–DEPARTURE ON LEAVE 
          8.34. Omitted. 

124 
[8.35-8.41] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
         8.35.  A  Government  employee  taking leave  out  of  India  must  report  his 
embarkation to the authority which granted his leave. 
          8.36.  Every  Government  employee  proceeding  on  leave  must  record  on  his 
application  for  leave,  the  address  at  which  letters  will  find  him  during  leave. 
Subsequent changes in address during leave, if any, should likewise be intimated to the 
head of the office or the head of department, as the case may be. 
          8.37 to 8.40.  Omitted.           
    V.–ACCEPTANCE OF EMPLOYMENT DURING LEAVE 
          8.41. A Government employee on leave may not take any service or accept any    
employment (including the setting up of a private professional practice as accountant, 
consultant,   or   legal   or   medical practitioner),   without   obtaining   the   previous        
sanction of –  
(a)   the   competent   authority,   if   the   proposed   service   or   employment   lies 
elsewhere than in India; 
(b)   the  Government,  or  any  lower  authority  empowered  to  appoint  him,  if  the 
proposed service or employment lies in India. 
           Note 1.–This rule does not apply to casual literary work or to service as an examiner or 
similar  employment,  nor  does  it  apply  to  acceptance  of  foreign  service  which  is  governed  by 
rule 10.2. The provisions of this note cannot be used as a means of evading the rules governing 
foreign  service  and  Government  employees  should  in  no  case  be  permitted  to  take  up  foreign 
service except on terms duly approved by the authority competent to sanction the transfer. 
           Note  2.–This  rule  should  not  be  construed  as  permitting  a  Government  employee  who 
avails  himself  of  leave  on  medical  certificate  to  undertake  regular  employment  during  such 
leave. 
           Note 3.–No permission for accepting employment during leave preparatory to retirement 
shall be granted: 
           Provided that in exceptional circumstances, the competent authority or the Government, 
as  the  case  may  be,  may  permit  the  Government  employee  to  accept  employment  with  any 
public  sector  undertaking  and  on  grant  of  such  permission,  the  leave  salary  shall  not  be 
restricted to that admissible during half-pay leave. 
            Note  4.–The leave salary of a Government employee permitted to take up employment 
during terminal leave granted under rule 8.138-A shall not be restricted to the amount of leave 
salary  admissible  during  the  half-pay-leave  but  shall  be  subject  to  reduction  on  account  of 
pension and pension equivalent of other retirement benefits and such a  Government employee 
shall be paid in lump sum the amount equivalent to leave salary and allowances, for the  entire 
period of such leave as one-time settlement.            
           

125 
[Chap. VIII]  LEAVE [8.41-8.42] 
           Note  5.–A  Government  employee  who  volunteers  for  premature  retrenchment  in  order 
to take up private employment should be treated as having resigned his post of his own volition 
and granted terminal leave  not exceeding half the  amount of earned leave  at  his credit and his 
leave-salary restricted to the amount of leave-salary admissible in respect of half pay leave. 
           Note  6.–Re-employed  pensioners  and  specialists/contract  officers  can  be  permitted  to 
take  up employment/service during the  currency of terminal leave, but in that case  their  leave 
salary should be restricted to the amount of leave salary admissible in respect of half pay leave. 
           Note  7.–This  rule  does  not  apply  where  a  Government  employee  has  been  allowed  to 
take up a limited amount of private practice and receives fees therefor as part of his conditions 
of services, e.g. where a right of private practice has been granted to a medical officer. 
          8.41-A.  (1)  In  case  a  Government  employee  who  has  proceeded  on  leave 
preparatory  to  retirement  before  the  date  of  compulsory  retirement  is  required  for 
employment  during  such  leave  in  any  post under  the  Punjab  Government  and  he  is 
agreeable to return to duty, he will be recalled to duty and the unexpired portion of his 
leave from the date of rejoining duty shall be cancelled. 
          (2)  The  leave  so  cancelled  under  sub-rule  (1), shall  be  allowed  to  be  encashed 
under the provisions of rule 8.21.          
            VI.–RECALL FROM LEAVE 
         8.42. In case a Government employee is recalled to duty before the expiry of his 
leave, he is entitled – 
(a)  if the leave from which he is recalled is out of India– 
  (i) to receive a free passage to India; and, provided that he has not completed 
half  the  period of his  leave  by  the  date  of leaving  for  India  on recall,  or 
three months, whichever period is shorter, to receive a refund of the cost 
of his passage from India; 
 (ii)  to  count  the  time  spent  on  the  voyage  to  India  as  duty  for  purposes  of  
calculating leave; and 
  (iii)  to receive leave salary during the voyage to India and for the period from 
the date of landing in India to the date of joining his post to be paid leave-
salary at the same rate at which he would have drawn it, had he not been 
recalled  but  returned  in  the  ordinary  course  on  the  termination  of  his 
leave  and  for  the  latter  period  travelling  allowance  under  the  Punjab 
Travelling Allowance Rules. 
          (b)  If  the  leave  from  which  he  is  recalled  is  in  India  to  be  treated  as  on  duty 
from  the  date  on  which  he  starts  for  the  station  to  which  he  is  ordered,  and  to draw 
travelling  allowance  under  the  Punjab  Travelling  Allowance Rules  for the journey,  

126 
[8.42-8.44] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
and to draw leave salary until he joins his post at the same rate at which he would have 
drawn it but for recall to duty. 
         Note  1.–Orders  recalling  a  Government  employee  on  leave  out  of  India  should  in  all 
cases be communicated to him through the High Commissioner for India. 
           Note  2.–The „concession‟ referred to in the second sentence of this rule is a concession 
of the category permitted by the rule. The concessions under this rule are clearly not intended to 
affect  the  privileges  of  Government  employees  which  are  admissible  under  other  rules,  the 
concessions  may  be  availed  of  when  they  happen  to  prove additional  to  or  better  than  the 
ordinary privileges. 
           Note  3.–The expression “on the termination of his leave”, in clause (a) (iii) of this rule 
means “on the termination of the period of leave as determined by his recall as opposed to the 
whole of the leave he was originally granted.”  The effect of this interpretation will be to make 
the  same  leave  salary  admissible  for  the  period of  transit  in  India  as  would  be  admissible  had 
the return to duty been voluntary and the period of voyage been leave proper and the period of 
transit in India been leave proper or joining time under Rule 9.1 as the case may be. 
           Note 4.– Omitted. 
 VII. RETURN FROM LEAVE 
 (1) Before expiry of leave. 
          8.43.  (1)  A  Government  employee  on  leave  may  not  return  to  duty  before  the 
expiry  of  the  period  of  leave  granted  to  him,  unless  he  is  permitted  to  do  so  by  the 
authority which granted him leave. 
         (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (1) a Government employee 
on leave preparatory to retirement shall be precluded from withdrawing his request for 
permission to retire and from returning to duty, save with the consent of the authority 
empowered to appoint him. 
(2) Return from leave on Medical Certificate. 
          8.44.  (i)  A  Government  employee  who  has  taken  leave  on  medical  certificate 
may  not  return  to  duty  until  he  has  produced  a  medical  certificate  in  the  following 
form:–  
Signature of the applicant ____________________. 
  I________________Civil Surgeon, Principal Medical Officer, Assistant to Civil 
Surgeon of _________________ 
I____________ *Registered  Medical  Practitioner  of________do  hereby  certify 
that I have examined A.B.C. of the _______________ Department  whose  signature is  
                                                           
* See rule 8.13 

127 
[Chap. VIII]                                          LEAVE [8.44-8.47] 
given  above  and  find  that  he  has  recovered  from  his  illness  and  is  now  fit  to  resume 
duties in Government service. I have  examined  the  original medical certificate(s) and 
statement(s)  of  the  case  (or  certified  copies  thereof)  on  which  leave  was granted  or 
extended and have taken these into consideration in arriving at my decision. 
        The original medical certificate(s) and statement(s) of the case on which the leave 
was  granted  or  extended  shall  be  produced  before  the  authority  asked  to  issue  the 
above  certificate.  For  this  purpose,  the  original  certificate(s)  and  statement(s)  should 
be  prepared  in  duplicate,  one  copy  being  retained  by  the  Government  employee 
concerned.                                                                        
        (ii)  The  authority  under  which  the  Government  employee  will  be  employed  on 
return from leave may, if it considers necessary, obtain a second medical opinion about 
the  fitness  of  the  Government  employee  to  resume  duty  by  requesting  the  Civil 
Surgeon, the  Principal Medical  Officer  or  the  Assistant  to  Civil  Surgeon  to  medically 
examine the Government employee.    
         In  the  exceptional  cases,  the  certificate  may  be  obtained  from  a  Commissioned 
Medical Officer or a Medical Officer-in-charge of a Civil Station. 
         If the Government employee on leave is not a Group „A‟ or Group „B‟ officer the 
authority  under  which  the  Government  employee  will  be  employed  on  return  from 
leave,  may,  at  his  discretion,  accept  a  certificate  signed  by  any  registered medical 
practitioner. 
                                Note.–A  Government  employee  who  had  been  suffering  from  tuberculosis  may  be 
allowed  to  resume  duty  on  the  basis  of  fitness certificate  which  recommends  light  work  for 
him. 
       8.44-A.  Omitted. 
(3) Report of return from leave. 
         8.45. A Government employee, on return from leave, must report his return to the 
authority granting the leave. 
         8.46. A Government employee returning from leave is not entitled, in the absence 
of specific orders to that effect, to resume, as a matter of course, the post which he held 
before going on leave.  He must report his return to duty and await orders. 
VIII.  OVERSTAYAL OF LEAVE 
         8.47.  (1)  Unless  the  authority  competent  to  grant  leave  extends  the leave,  a 
Government employee who remains absent after the end of leave is entitled to no leave  
salary  for  the period of such absence and that period shall be debited against his leave 
 

128 
[8.47-8.50]  THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
account as though it were half pay leave, to the extent such leave is due, the period in 
excess of such leave due being treated as extraordinary leave. 
(2)  Wilful  absence  from  duty  after  the  expiry  of  leave  renders  a  Government 
employee liable to disciplinary action. 
IX.   LEAVE-SALARY 
(1) General 
                               8.48. Subject to any instructions given by the competent authority in connection 
with  the  control  of  the  issue  of  money  from  treasuries  or  by  the  Comptroller  and 
Auditor  General  of  India  in  order  to  secure  efficiency  and  uniformity  of  audit,  the 
following rules prescribe the procedure to be followed: – 
                 (i)   in the payment of leave-salary; and 
                (ii)   in the maintenance of record of service. 
           Note.–The instructions regarding leave procedure and maintenance of service record are 
given in Appendix-11 in Part II of this Volume.          
(2) Payment of leave-salary. 
          8.49.  (1)  Unless  the  competent  authority  by  general  or  special  order  otherwise 
directs, leave salary shall be drawn in rupee in India. 
          (2) Omitted. 
          (3) Omitted. 
(4) Omitted. 
(5) Omitted. 
X. LEAVE ACCOUNTS 
          8.50. A  leave  account  for  each  Government  employee  subject  to  the  Revised 
Leave  Rules  contained  in  Section  III  of  this  Chapter,  shall  be  maintained  in  form 
Punjab C.S.R. No.16. 
         Note  1.–A  separate  leave  account  should  be  kept  of the  leave  earned  by  a  Government 
employee  serving  under  a  Government  and  then  transferred  to  another  Government  and  all 
leave  taken  after  the  date  of  transfer  should  be debited  to  this  account  so  long  as  the  balance 
under it is not exhausted and the  allowance drawn during all leave  which is so debited should 
be charged to that Government. 
          Note 2.  Omitted. 
          Note  3.–The  balance  of  earned  leave  or  half  pay  leave  at  the  credit  of  a  Government 
employee shall invariably be indicated on the order sanctioning such leave to that employee. 

129 
[Chap. VIII] LEAVE  [8.51-8.58] 
          8.51.  The  leave  account  of  a  Group  „A‟  or „B‟  and  Group  „C‟  or „D‟ 
Government employee shall be maintained by the Head of the Department and by the 
Head of Office, as the case may be, in which he is employed. 
      XI. EXTENT AND APPLICATION 
     (1)  Application of Revised Leave Rules 
       8.52. For  purposes  of  grant  of  leave  and  leave  salary,  the  Government 
employees  other  than  those  engaged  on  contract  (vide  Rule  8.57)  or  those  for 
whom  special  provision  regarding  leave  has  been  made,  are  subject  to  the 
revised leave rules contained in Section III of this Chapter.     
           Note.–The staff employed on Central Agency Work will be governed by the leave rules 
of  the  Central  Government  or  these `rules  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  set  forth  in 
Annexure II of section I of this Chapter. 
         8.53.  Omitted. 
          8.54.  Omitted.  
          8.55.  The rules in this section are not applicable to Government employees paid 
from  Defence  Estimates  who  are  temporarily  transferred  to  service,  paid  from  Civil 
Estimates,  (including  service  in  a  tenure  post).  Such  Government  employees  remain 
subject to the rules which applied to them before their transfer.  
          8.56.  Omitted.  
          8.57.  Leave  admissible  to  Government  employees  engaged  on  contract  will  be 
determined by the terms of their contracts: Provided that no leave will be admissible in 
excess  of the  leave  which  would  be  admissible  to  a  Government  employee  holding  a 
permanent post.  
          Note.–Model Leave Terms for Government employees engaged on contract are given in 
Part I of Appendix–16, in Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part II.  
           8.58.  Leave  on  medical  certificate  to  Government  employees  subject  to  Rules 
8.131  and  8.132  shall  not  be  granted  for  a  period  extending  beyond  the term  of  the 
Government  employee‟s  contract  unless  or  until  it  has  been  decided  to  retain  him  in 
permanent employment. 
                            Note.–The  provisions  of  Rule  8.21  apply mutatis  mutandis to  Government  employees 
engaged on contract. 

130 
[8.59-8.61] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
          (2)  Periods of Off Duty which are not treated as Regular Leave. 
(a) Vacation 
           8.59. Unless the contrary appears from the context vacation counts as duty and 
not as leave. 
           A  competent  authority  may  specify  the  departments  or  parts  of  departments 
which  should  be  treated  as  vacation  departments  and  the  conditions  in  which  a 
Government employee should be considered to have availed himself of a vacation. 
          Note.–The orders issued under this rule are given in the Annexure I to this section. 
(b)  Casual and Quarantine leave 
          8.60. A  Government  employee  on  casual  leave  or  on  quarantine  leave  is  not 
treated,  as  absent  from  duty  and  his  pay and  allowances  are  not  intermitted,  as  such 
leave is not recognised regular leave and is not subject to the rules in this Chapter. 
           8.61. Rules  regulating  the  grant  of casual  leave  and  quarantine  leave  are given 
in Appendix 17 in Part II of this Volume. 
 ANNEXURE I 
 (See Rule 8.59) 
         1.   A  vacation  department  is  a  department,  or  part  of  a  department,  to  which 
regular  vacations  are  allowed  during  which  Government  employees  serving  in  the 
department are permitted to be absent from duty. 
         2.  (i)  The  following  classes  of  Government  employees  serve  in  vacation 
department when the conditions of paragraph 1 above are fulfilled :– 
   (a)  Educational  Officers,  other  than  the  Director  of  Public  Instruction  and   
inspecting officers, and their establishment. 
   (b)  Judicial  officers  of  rank  not  higher  than  that  of  subordinate  judge  and       
their establishments – 
  (c)  Any other class of Government employees which a competent authority 
may declare to be so serving. 
   (ii)  In case of doubt, a competent authority may decide whether  or  not  a 
particular Government employee is serving in a vacation department. 

131 
 [Chap. VIII]   LEAVE  [Annexures I & II] 
           Note  1.–District  and  Sessions  Judges  may,  with  the  express  permission  of  the Hon‟ble 
Judges of the High Court, avail themselves, without prejudice to their regular leave, of so much 
of  the  vacation  during  the  month  of  September  as  is  not  needed  for  the  disposal  of  Criminal 
business  :  Provided  that  suitable  arrangements,  with  the  approval  of  the  High  Court, can  be 
made for the disposal of work and that the State is not put to any additional expenditure in  the 
way of telegraph, postal or other similar charges.  At places where there are two or more Judges 
in a Sessions Court, they may subject to the condition that at least one of them remains on duty, 
avail  themselves  of  the  vacation  on  dates  falling  between  the  24
th
 August  and 8
th
 October.  
Vacation in their case shall be treated as recognised holidays. 
        Note  2.–A  complete  list  of  Government  employees  serving  in  vacation  departments  is 
given in Appendix 18 in Part II of this Volume. 
         3. A Government employee serving in a vacation department shall be considered 
to  have  availed  himself  of  a  vacation,  or  a portion  of  a  vacation,  unless  he  has  been 
required, by general or special order of a higher authority, to forego such vacation, or 
portion  of  a  vacation: Provided  that  if  he  has  been  prevented  by  such  an  order  from 
enjoying more than 15 days of vacation, he shall be considered to have availed himself 
of no portion of the vacation. 
         Note 1.–A Government employee who has routine duties to discharge during a vacation 
which  do  not  require  his  presence  at  his  place of duty  and which can be performed either 
by himself at some other place or by some other Government employee, shall be considered to 
have availed himself of a vacation or a part of it. A Government employee who absents himself 
from his place of duty during any part of vacation is expected to arrange for and is responsible 
for  the  performance  without  any  cost  to  Government,  of  such  routine  duty.    Should  a 
Government employee who is absent from the place of duty during any portion of a vacation be 
recalled thereto, he will not be entitled to travelling allowance unless the vacation is combined 
with leave. 
                                 Note  2.–The  words  “higher  authority”  occurring  in  this  paragraph  mean  in  the  case  of 
the  head of an office  or institution the Head of  Department and in other cases the head  of the 
office or institution. 
        ANNEXURE II 
            (Referred to in Note 3 below Rule 8.52) 
 
       1.   The staff employed on Union Agency work will be governed by the leave rules 
of  the  Union  Government  or  the  rules  of  the  Punjab  Government  in  accordance  with 
the following principles. 

132 
[Annexure II] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
          2.   Such staff may be divided into the following categories:– 
(a)   Personnel recruited for and employed in agency departments whose pay, 
leave  salary,  allowances  and  pensions  are  charged  direct  to  the  Union 
Government,   i.e.,   personnel   who   are   paid   direct   by   the   Union       
Government  but  who  are  technically  under  the  administrative  control  of 
the Punjab Government. 
(b)   Personnel  recruited  and  employed  in  connection  with  the  affairs  of  the 
Punjab, whose pay, leave salary, allowances and pensions are charged to 
State    revenues,    but    whom    the    Punjab    Government    employs         
temporarily on agency work. For their services the Union Government         
pays the Punjab Government an agreed sum and the entire leave charges 
are borne by the latter. 
(c)    Personnel  as  in  category  (b)  above  whose  services  are  employed  by  the 
Punjab  Government  part-time  or casually,  on  performing  Union  Agency 
duties.  For their services the Union Government usually pays an agreed 
sum to the Punjab Government which includes leave charges. 
(d)   Personnel  falling  in  either  of  the  three  categories  given  above  who  have 
from   1
st
 April,   1937   come   under   the   direct   control   of   the   Union 
Government  on  resumption  by  them  of  the  administrative  control  over 
certain agency functions. 
          3. (i)  The Government employees belonging to category (a) who were recruited 
on  or  after  1
st
 April,  1937  would  be  governed,  by  the  leave  rules  of  the  Union 
Government. 
              (ii) The   Government   employees   falling   under   categories   (b)   and   (c) 
(irrespective  of  the  dates  of  recruitment)  would  remain  under  the  leave  rules  of  the 
Punjab  Government and  the  Union  Government  would  meet  their share  of  leave 
charges as calculated under these rules. 
     SECTION II  
                                              Old Leave Rules 
          8.62 to 8.112.  Omitted.       

133 
[Chap. VIII]   LEAVE  [8.113] 
SECTION III–REVISED LEAVE RULES 
     DEFINITIONS 
          8.113.   In the rules in this section – 
 (i)     “leave” includes earned leave, half pay leave, commuted leave, leave  
           not due and extraordinary leave; 
(ii)      “earned leave” means leave earned in respect of periods spent on duty; 
(iii)    “half pay leave” means leave earned in respect of completed years of    
service; 
(iv)    “earned leave due” means the amount of earned leave to the credit of a 
Government  employee,  calculated  in  the  manner  prescribed  in  rules 
8.116, 8.117 and 8.133, as the case may be, diminished by the amount 
of earned leave taken by him under these rules; 
 (v)     “Half pay leave due” means the amount of half pay leave calculated as 
prescribed  in  Rule  8.119  for  the entire  service  diminished  by  the 
amount of half pay leave taken under these rules; 
(vi)     “Commuted leave” means leave taken under, clause (c) of Rule 8.119. 
(vii)   “Government  employee  in  a  permanent employ”  means  a  Government 
employee who holds substantively a permanent post or holds a lien on a 
permanent post.  
(viii)   “Completed  years  of  service”  and  “one  year‟s  continuous  service‟ 
means  continuous  service  of  the  specified  duration  under  the  Punjab 
Government  and  includes  periods  spent  on  duty  as  well  as  on  leave 
including extraordinary leave; 
(ix)     “Military Officer” means an officer of the Armed Forces who is – 
  (i)   a Commissioned Officer of the Army, Navy or the Air Force; or  
        (ii)  (a)  a junior commissioned officer (including an honorary 
commissioned officer) or an “other rank” of the Army; or 
                               (b) a Branch list officer or a rating of the Navy, or 
                               (c) an  air-man  including  a Master  Warrant  Officer  of  the  Air   
Force. 
  (x)  “Vacation Department” means a department, or part of a department, to 
which   regular   vacations   are   allowed,   during   which   Government 
employees  serving  in  the  Department  are  permitted  to  be  absent  from 
duty. 

134 
[8.114-8.116] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
GENERAL RULES AND CONDITIONS 
          8.114. Any kind of leave under these rules may be granted in combination with 
or in continuation of any other kind of leave. 
          8.115. The  authority  which  granted  leave  to  a Government  employee  can 
commute it retrospectively into leave of a different kind which may be admissible but 
the Government employee concerned cannot claim it as a matter of right. 
          8.115-A . Omitted. 
                           PART–A. LEAVE TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES IN     
                                                        PERMANENT EMPLOY 
                                                        GENERAL PROVISIONS 
                                                (i)  Earned Leave 
          8.116. (i) The earned leave admissible to a Government employee in permanent 
employ is :– 
 (a)   1/24th of the period spent on duty, during the first 10 years of his service; 
 (b)   1/18th of the period spent on duty during the next 10 years of his service; 
and 1/12th of the period spent on duty, thereafter. 
Note 1.–For the purpose of assessing the “length of service” under this sub-rule, break in 
service caused as a result of retrenchment shall not entail forfeiture of previous service. Further, 
in the case of women Government employees break in service due to resignation as a result of 
family  circumstances  of  the  Government  employee  concerned,  shall  also  be  condoned  by  the 
re-appointing authority; provided the duration of break does not exceed 10 years. 
          Note  2.–In  calculating  earned  leave,  the  actual  number  of  days  of  duty  performed  shall 
first  be  counted  and  then  multiplied  by  1/12,  1/18,  1/24  as  the  case  may  be  and  the  product 
expressed in days and fraction of day.  In case, there is a change in the rate of earning of leave, 
the fraction in the earned leave shall be rounded off to the nearest day that is fraction below half 
shall be ignored and that half or more shall be reckoned as one day. 
          Note  3.–The  period  spent  on  duty  shall  include  all  kinds  of  leave,  except  extraordinary 
leave, for the purpose of calculation of earned leave. 
  (ii)  Accumulation of earned leave is permissible upto 450 days. 
   (iii)  Leave preparatory to retirement may be allowed upto 300 days on full pay, 
provided it is due. 
         Note 1.– Omitted. 
          

135 
  [Chap. VIII] LEAVE      [8.116-8.119] 
          Note 2.–The  leave  granted  as  leave  preparatory  to  retirement  shall  not  include 
extraordinary leave. 
          Note 3.–In  a  case,  where a  Government  employee  who  is  required  to  retire,  or  who 
himself chooses to be retired before the age of superannuation, he may be allowed the leave due 
and  admissible  to  him  as  indicated  below,  provided  it  does  not  extend  beyond  the  date on 
which he attains the age of superannuation:– 
             (i)  leave preparatory to retirement upto 300 days on full pay, if it is due; or 
(ii)  earned  leave  upto  the  extent leave  preparatory  to  retirement  is  admissible  as  in 
clause (i) with permission to combine it with any other kind of leave, if due. 
          8.117. (a)  A  Government  employee  serving  in  a  vacation  department, shall  be 
entitled to earned leave of eight days for every completed year spent on duty:  
               Provided that if in any year, he is prevented from availing himself of the full 
vacation,  earned  leave  shall  be  admissible  in  respect  of  that  year  in  accordance  with 
the provisions of Rule 8.116:  
               Provided further that if in any year, he is prevented from availing himself of a 
part of vacation, the earned leave proportionately admissible to him under sub-rule (b), 
together  with  earned  leave  of  eight  days  admissible  under  this  sub-rule,  shall  not 
exceed the maximum earned leave admissible under rule 8.116. 
           (b) The earned leave admissible to such Government employee in respect of any 
year  in  which  he  is  prevented  from  availing  himself  of  the  full  vacation  is  such 
proportion of the following periods as the number of days of vacation not taken bears 
the full vacation:– 
            (i)  to a Government employee with 10 years‟ service or less; 
                                                                                                  15 days. 
  (ii)  to a Government employee with more than ten years service but not 
exceeding 20 years service; 
                                                                                                 20 days. 
           (iii)  to a Government employee with over 20 years service; 
                                                                                                 30 days.           
   (c) Vacation may be  taken in combination with or in continuation of any kind 
of leave under the rules in this section.  
          8.118.  Omitted.    
       (ii) Half pay leave, commuted leave and „Leave not due‟. 
          8.119. (a)   The   half   pay   leave   admissible   to a   Government   employee   in 
permanent employ in respect of each completed year of „service‟ is 20 days. 

136 
 [8.119] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
            (b)  The  half  pay  leave  due  may  be  granted  to  a  Government  employee  on 
medical certificate or on private affairs. 
            (c) Commuted leave not exceeding half the amount of half pay leave due may 
be  granted  to  a  Government  employee  on  medical  certificate  only  subject  to  the 
following conditions :– 
             (i)    Commuted leave during the entire service shall be limited to a maximum 
of (240) days; 
 (ii)   when commuted leave is granted, twice the amount of such leave shall be  
debited against the half pay leave due; 
            (iii)  Half  pay  leave  up  to  a  maximum  of  180  days  shall  be  allowed  to  be 
commuted  during  the  entire  service  where  such  leave  is  utilised  for  an 
approved course of study certified to be in the public interest by the leave 
sanctioning authority: 
          Provided  that  no  commuted  leave  may  be  granted  under  this  rule  unless  the 
authority  competent  to sanction  leave  has  reason  to  believe  that  the  Government 
employee  will  return  to  duty  on  its  expiry,  and  provided  further  that  no  commuted 
leave may be granted unless it has been applied for at least 15 days at a time.  
         Note  1.–The  option  once  exercised  will  be  final  and  debars  a  Government  employee 
from claiming re-conversion, as a matter of right, though the authority which granted leave can 
(if so disposed) allow it. 
           Note  2.–When  commuted  leave  is  granted  to  a  Government  employee  under  this  rule 
and  he  intends  to  retire  subsequently,  the  commuted  leave  should  be  converted  into  half  pay 
leave  and  the  difference  between  the  leave  salary  in  respect  of  commuted  leave  and  half  pay 
leave  should  be  recovered.  An  undertaking  to  this  effect  should,  therefore,  be  taken  from  the 
Government  employee  who  avails  himself  of  commuted  leave  but  the  question  whether  the 
Government employees concerned should be called upon to refund the amount drawn in excess 
as  leave  salary  should  be  decided  on  merits of  each  case,  i.e.  if  the  retirement  is  voluntary, 
refund  should  be  enforced,  but  if  the  retirement  is  compulsorily  thrust  upon  him  by  reason  of 
ill-health, incapacitating him for further service or in the event of his death no refund should be 
taken. 
(d) Save  in the  case  of leave  preparatory  to retirement  „leave  not  due‟  may  be 
granted  to  a  Government  employee  in  permanent  employ  for  a  period  not  exceeding 
360 days  during his  entire  service, out of which  not more  than  90 days  at a  time  and 
180  days  in  all, may  be  otherwise  than  on  medical  certificate.  Such  leave  will  be 
debited against the half pay leave the Government employee may earn subsequently. 
           Note  1.–Leave  not  due  should  be  granted  only  if  the  authority  empowered  to  sanction 
leave  is  satisfied  that  there  is  reasonable prospect of  the Government employee returning to  

137 
[Chap. VIII] LEAVE                 [8.119] 
duty on the  expiry of the  leave  and should be  limited to the  half pay leave  he  is likely  to earn 
thereafter. 
           Note 2.–Omitted. 
           Note 3.–Omitted. 
                                        Note  4.–As  for  half  pay  leave  in  respect  of  a  completed  year  of  service  during  which 
service was rendered partly in a Group „C‟ post and partly in a Group „D‟ post, this leave will 
be calculated on a pro-rata basis separately in respect of Group „C‟ service or Group „D‟ service 
and then added up. The fraction, if any, present in the total half pay leave for the particular year 
will be ignored if it is less than half, or reckoned as one day if it is half or more. 
           Note  5.  Omitted.  
           Note 6.–The half pay leave earned by a Government employee in respect of a completed 
year  of  service  can  be  availed  of  by  him  during  the  course  of  a  spell  of  leave  or  during  an 
extension thereof within which the date of anniversary of service falls. 
           Note  7.–Where  a  Government  employee  who  has  been  granted  „Leave  not  due‟  under 
this  clause  applies  for  permission  to  retire,  voluntarily,  the „leave  not  due‟ shall,  if  the 
permission is granted be cancelled and his retirement shall have effect from the date on which 
such  leave  commenced.  An  undertaking  to  this  effect  should,  therefore,  be  taken  from 
Government  employee  as  who  avail  of  „Leave  not  due‟.  But  the question   whether   a 
Government  employee  should  be  called  upon  to  refund  the  amount  of  leave  salary  should  be 
decided on the merits of each case e.g. if the retirement is voluntary refund should be enforced:  
if it is unavoidable by reason of ill health incapacitating him for further service or in the event 
of his death no refund should be insisted upon. 
           Note  8.–When “leave not due” is granted to a Government employee under this clause 
and  he  applied  for  permission  to  retire  voluntarily  or  resigns of  his  own  volition  at  any  time 
after  returning  to  duty,  the  question  of  refund  of  leave  salary  in  respect  of  the  leave  not  due 
already availed of before return to duty shall, to the extent it has not been subsequently wiped 
off, be treated in the same way as laid down in note 7 above. 
          Note  9.–Where  a  Government  employee  who  having  availed  himself  of  the  „leave  not 
due‟ returns to duty and is retired from service under sub-rule (1) of rule 3 of the Punjab Civil 
Services (Premature Retirement) Rules, 1975 and has not been able to earn half pay leave to the 
extent of the „leave not due‟ granted to him before such retirement, he shall not be called upon 
to refund the amount of leave salary in respect of that „leave not due‟. 
         8.120. Omitted. 
 

138 
 [8.121-8.122] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
                                                (iii) Extraordinary Leave. 
         8.121.  (1)  Extraordinary  leave  may  be  granted  to  any  Government  employee  in 
special circumstances:– 
      (a)   when no other leave is admissible, or  
      (b)   when other leave is admissible, but Government employee concerned     
              applies in writing for the grant of extraordinary leave. 
         (2)  The authority empowered to grant leave may commute retrospectively:– 
                (a)   period of absence without leave into extraordinary leave. 
                (b)   extraordinary leave granted into leave of a different kind if the latter                     
                        type  of  leave  was  admissible  at  the time extraordinary leave was                                
                        granted. 
           Note  1.–The power of commuting retrospectively, period of absence without leave into 
extraordinary leave under clause (b) is absolute and not subject to the conditions mentioned in 
clause  (a);  in  other  words,  such  a  commutation  is  permissible  even  when  other  leave  was 
admissible  to  the  Government  employee  concerned  at  the  time  his  absence  without  leave 
commenced. This  concession,  however,  cannot  be  claimed  by  Government  employee  as  a 
matter of right. 
         Note 2.–The concession admissible under clause (2) cannot be claimed by a Government 
employee as a matter of right. 
           Note  3.–Extraordinary  leave  granted  to  a  Government  employee  on  medical  certificate 
may  be  commuted  retrospectively  into  „leave  not  due‟  at  the  discretion  of  the  authority 
competent to sanction leave in respect of extraordinary leave taken on medical certificate after 
the  31
st
 August,  1949.  Such  a  commutation  is  also  permissible  in  a  case  where  extraordinary 
leave  was  granted  to  a  Government  employee  on  medical  certificate  during  temporary  service 
after the 31
st
 August, 1949, and he is subsequently confirmed or declared quasi-permanent with 
effect from a date earlier than the commencement of the extraordinary leave. 
           Note  4.–Extraordinary  leave  taken  by  a  Government  employee  otherwise  than  on 
medical certificate after the 11
th
 September, 1955, may also be Commuted into „leave not due‟ 
at the discretion of the authority competent to sanction leave. 
LEAVE SALARY 
          8.122.  (1)  An  officer  on  earned  leave  shall be  entitled  to  leave  salary  equal  to 
the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on earned leave. 
           (2) An officer on half pay leave or leave not due is entitled to leave salary equal 
to half the amount specified in sub-rule (1)       
           (3) An officer on commuted leave is entitled to leave salary equal to the amount 
admissible under sub-rule (1). 

139 
 [Chap. VIII] LEAVE                 [8.122] 
          (4)  An officer on extraordinary leave is not entitled to any leave salary. 
          (5)  Omitted. 
(6)  In  the  case  of a  person  to  whom  the  Employees State  Insurance  Act,  1948 
(34 of 1948) applies, leave salary payable during leave, other than earned leave, shall 
be reduced by the amount of benefits payable under the said Act for the corresponding 
period. 
(7)   Leave salary up to one month may be allowed in advance to all Government 
employees proceeding on earned leave subject to the following conditions:– 
          (a)  No advance may be granted when the leave taken is less than thirty days; 
(b) The  amount  of  the  advance  should  be  restricted  to  the  net  amount  of  leave 
salary  for  the  first  month  of  leave  that  is  clearly  admissible  to  the  Government 
employee  after  deductions  on  account of Income Tax, Provident Fund, contribution 
towards   New   Defined   Contributory   Pension   Scheme, house   rent,   repayment   of 
advances etc.; 
(c)  The advance  should be adjusted  in full in the  leave  salary bill in respect of 
the  leave  availed  of where the  advance  cannot be  adjusted in full, the  balance should 
be recovered from the next payment of pay or and leave salary; 
(d) The  advance  may  be  sanctioned  by  the  Head  of  office  or  by  any  other 
subordinate officer to whom the power may be specially delegated, to all Government 
employees irrespective of the Group of Service to which they belong. Officers who are 
Heads of Offices may sanction the advances themselves; 
(e) The  amount  of  advance  will  be  debited  to the  head  of  account to  which  the 
pay, etc., of the employee is debited and the adjustment of the advance will be watched 
by the Drawing & Disbursing Officer. 
(f)  Advances shall be sanctioned in whole rupee. 
  (8) If a Government  employee including  a  military  pensioner re-employed  in 
civil service, dies while in service, the cash equivalent of the leave salary (carrying the 
appropriate  amount  of  dearness  allowance)  in  respect  of  earned  leave  at  his  credit 
subject to a maximum of 300 days in entire service, shall be paid to his family.  
 Note.– During re-employment after retirement  from pensionable  service, if pension of  a 
Government  is  allowed  to  be  drawn  separately,  a  suitable  reduction  being  made  in  the            
re-employed  pay,  his  leave  salary  during  the  period  of  earned  leave  or  half  pay leave  or 
commuted  leave, shall  be  based  on the net re-employed pay  i.e. exclusive of the pension and  

140 
 [8.122-8.124] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
he shall continue  to  draw  the pension separately in addition. The pension shall continue to be 
drawn by him during the period of extraordinary leave also. 
          8.123. Omitted. 
 ADDITIONAL KIND OF LEAVE IN SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES 
  (i)  Special Disability Leave 
          8.124. Subject to the conditions in clauses hereunder:– 
 (1)  Such leave shall not be granted unless the disability manifested itself within 
3 months of the occurrence to which it is attributed and the persons disabled acted with 
due  promptitude  in  bringing  it  to  the  notice,  but  the  competent  authority  if it is 
satisfied as to the cause of disability may permit leave to be granted in cases where the 
disability manifested itself more than 3 months after the occurrence of its cause. 
 (2)   The  period of leave  granted  shall be  such  as  is  certified  by  the  authorised 
Medical Attendant of the Government employee concerned to be necessary. It shall not 
be  extended  except  on the certificate  of that  authority  and  shall  in  no  case  exceed  24 
months. 
 (3)   Such leave may be combined with leave of any other kind. 
 (4) Such leave may be granted more than once if the disability is aggravated or 
reproduced  in  similar  circumstances  at  a  later  date,  but  not  more  than  24  months  of 
such leave shall be granted in consequence of any one disability. 
                 (5)  (a)  In  the  case  of  a  person  to  whom Workmen‟s  Compensation  Act,  1923 
applies,  the  amount  of  leave  salary  payable  under  this  rule  shall  be  reduced  by  the 
amount of compensation payable under section 4(1)(d) of the said Act. 
    (b) In the case of a person to whom the Employees‟ State Insurance Act, 1948 
(34  of  1948),  applies,  the  amount  of  leave  salary  payable  shall  be  reduced  by  the 
amount of benefit admissible under the said Act, for the corresponding period. 
   (6)  The   provisions   of   this   rule   apply   to   a   Civil   employee disabled   in 
consequence  of  service  with  a  Military  force  if  he  is  discharged  as  unfit  for  further 
military  service  but is  not completely  and  permanently  incapacitated  for  further Civil 
service  and  to  a  Civil  employee,  not  so  discharged  who  suffers  a  disability,  which  is 
certified by a Medical Board, to be directly attributable to his service, with a military 
force; but in either case, any period of  leave  granted to such a person under military 
rules in respect of that disability shall be reckoned as leave granted under this rule for 
the purpose of calculating the period admissible. 
          Note.– The  intention of  the  above  clause  is  not  that special disability leave should be 
given  to  cover   any  portion  of  Government  employee‟s  military  service, but that  it should 

141 
  [Chap. VIII]                                             LEAVE      [8.124-8.126] 
be admissible  only  after  the  Government  employee‟s  discharge  as  unfit  for  further  military 
service.  
           A competent  authority  may grant  special  disability  leave  to  a  Government  employee 
who  is  disabled  by  injury  intentionally  inflicted  or  caused  in  or  in  consequence  of,  due 
performance of his official duties or in consequence of his official position, as follows:– 
(I)  Such  leave  shall  be  counted  as  duty  in  calculating  service  for  pension,  but  half  the 
amount  of  such  leave  on  full  pay  taken  under  clause  III  below  shall  be  counted  as 
“earned leave” taken. 
(II)  Leave  salary  during  such  leave  including  a  period  of  such  leave  granted  under 
condition (4) above shall be equal to full pay for the first 120 days. 
 (III)  For  the  remaining  period  of  any  such  leave, to  half pay, or  at the Government              
          employee‟s option for a period not exceeding the period of earned leave, otherwise   
          admissible to him under rule 8.116 or 8.117 to full pay. 
           Note.– Leave salary during special disability leave will be regulated under rule 8.122. 
          8.125.  The   application   of   provisions   of   Rule   8.124   may subject   to   the 
conditions   given   below   be   extended   by   a   competent   authority   to   Government 
employees  disabled  by  injury  accidentally  incurred  in  or  in  consequence  of  the  due 
performance  of  his  official  duties  or  in  consequence  of  his  official  position  or  by 
illness  incurred  in  the  performance  of  any  particular  duty,  which  has  the  effect  in 
increasing  his  inability  to  illness  or  injury,  beyond  the  ordinary  risk  attaching  to  the 
Civil post, which he holds:– 
(1) The disability if due to disease must be certified by the Authorised Medical 
Attendant of the Government employee concerned to be directly due to the 
performance of the particular duty; 
(2) If the  Government employee has contracted such  disability during service, 
otherwise  than  with  a  military  force,  it  must  be  in  the  opinion  of  the 
competent authority exceptional in character; 
(3) The period of absence recommended by the Authorised Medical Attendant 
of  the  Government  employee  concerned  may  be  covered  in  part  by  leave 
under this rule and in part by other leave; and  
(4) The amount of special disability leave granted on full pay shall be less than 
120 days.   
                                                 (ii)  Study Leave 
          8.126.  Leave  may  be  granted  to  Government  employees  on  such  terms  as       
may be prescribed by  general  or  special  orders  of  the  competent  authority  to  enable 
them  to study scientific, technical or similar problems or to undergo special courses of 

142 
  [8.126-8.127] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
instruction. Such leave is not debited against the leave account. 
           Note.–For  general  orders  issued  under  this  rule  see Appendix  20 in  Part  II  of  this 
Volume.  
                                    (iii) Maternity Leave and Hospital Leave 
          8.127. (a)  The  competent  authority  under  Rule  8.23  may  grant  to  a  female 
Government employee maternity leave on full pay for a period not exceeding 180 days 
without  the  necessity  of  production  of  a  medical  certificate  and  the  grant  of  such  a 
leave, shall be so regulated that the date of confinement falls within the period of this 
leave  and  the  leave  so  granted  shall  not  be  debited  against  the  leave  account  of  the 
female Government employee: 
 Provided  that  no  leave  under  this  sub-rule  shall  be  granted  to  a  female 
Government employee who has three or more living children. 
         Note.–Extension  in  leave,  if  any,  on  the  expiry  of  maximum  period  of  180  days 
maternity leave, shall be permissible by the grant of leave of the kind due. 
           Note  1.–During such  period  she  shall  be  paid  leave  salary  equal  to  the  pay  drawn 
immediately before proceeding on leave. The term “pay” in this rule includes officiating pay: 
provided  the  authority  sanctioning  the  leave  certifies  that  the  Government  employee  would 
have continued to officiate had she not proceeded on leave. 
           Note  2.–Where  a  female  Government  employee  has  less  than  two  living  children, 
maternity  leave  under  this  rule  may  also  be  granted  in  cases  of  miscarriages  and  abortion 
including abortion included under the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971, subject to 
the  conditions that  the  leave  does  not  exceed  six  weeks  and  the  application  for  leave  is 
supported  by  a  certificate  from  a  registered  medical  practitioner specified  in  rule  8.13 and, in 
case  of  doubt,  certificate  of  a  Principal  Medical  Officer  or  Assistant  to a Civil  Surgeon  or 
Senior Medical Officer may be called for: 
          Provided  that  a  female  Government  employee  having  two  or  more  children  shall  not  be 
entitled to avail of this concession, but if required, can be sanctioned leave of the kind due, on 
the production of a medical certificate. 
          Note  3.–In the case of a person to whom the provisions of Employees‟ State Insurance 
Act, 1948 apply, leave salary payable under this rule shall be reduced by the amount of benefit 
admissible  under the said Act for the corresponding period. 
         8.127. (b) Any other kind of leave may be permitted to be prefixed in maternity 
leave   without   insisting   on   a   medical   certificate.  But any   leave   applied   for   in 
continuation  of  maternity  leave  may  be  granted  only  if  the  request  is  supported  by  a 
medical certificate. 
           Note 1.–This rule does not preclude the grant of maternity leave in continuation of leave 
of any kind.            
           Note 2.–Omitted. 

143 
[Chap. VIII] LEAVE      [8.127-8.128] 
           Note 3.–Regular leave in continuation of maternity leave may also be granted in case of 
illness of a newly born baby, subject to the female Government employee producing a medical 
certificate  from  the  authorised  medical  attendant  to  the  effect  that  the  condition  of  the  ailing 
baby  warrants  mother‟s  personal  attention  and  her  presence  by  the  baby‟s  side  is  absolutely 
necessary. 
          8.127. (c)  The competent  authority  under  rule  8.23  of  these  rules  may  grant 
hospital leave to a Group „D‟ Government employee and such Group „C‟ Government 
employee whose duties involve handling of dangerous machinery, explosive material, 
poisonous  drugs, etc.,  or  the  performance  of  hazardous tasks,  while  under  medical 
treatment for illness or injury if such illness or injury is directly due to risks incurred in 
the course of their official duties. 
         Note  1.–In  the  case  of  persons  to  whom  the  Workmen‟s  Compensation Act,  1923 
applies  the  amount  of  leave  salary  shall  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of  compensation  payable 
under Section 4(1) (d) of the said Act. 
           Note  2.–Industrial  and  work-charged  staff  will  also  be  entitled  to  Hospital  leave  in  the 
same manner as other State Government employees. 
           Note 3.–Hospital  leave  should  be  granted  on  the  production  by  the  Government 
employee  concerned  of  a  medical  certificate  from  a  superior  officer,  not  below  the  rank  of 
Senior Medical Officer to the effect that the illness or injury was directly due to risk incurred in 
the course of official duties and also that the leave recommended is necessary to effect a cure. 
           Note 4.–In the case of a person to whom the provisions of Employees‟ State Insurance 
Act,  1948  apply,  leave  salary  payable  under  these  rules  shall  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of 
benefit admissible under the said Act for the corresponding period. 
         8.127. (d)  Hospital  leave  may  be  granted  for  such  period  as  the  authority 
granting it may consider necessary, on leave salary. 
            (i) equal  to  leave  salary  while  on  earned  leave,  for  the  first  120  days  of  any 
period of such leave; and 
(ii) equal to leave salary during half pay leave, for the remaining  period of any 
such leave. 
          8.127.  (e)  Hospital  leave  is  not  debited  against  the  leave  account  and  may  be 
combined with any other leave which may be admissible; provided that the total period 
of leave, after such combination, shall not exceed 28 months. 
  (iv) Paternity Leave 
         8.128. (1) A  male  Government  employee having less  than  two  surviving 
children,   may   be   granted   Paternity   Leave   upto  a   maximum   of   15   days   (after 
commuting half pay leave of 30 days).  

144 
[8.128-8.128B] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
          (2)  Such  leave  shall  be  admissible during  the  confinement  of  his  wife  for 
childbirth,  i.e.  upto  15  days  before  or  upto  15  days  after  the  date  of  delivery  of  the 
child. 
          (3) During the period of such leave, the Government employee shall be entitled 
to leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave. 
    Note. – Paternity leave shall not normally be refused.  
(v)  Adoption Leave 
8.128-A. Adoption  leave  may  be  granted  to  a  woman  Government  employee, 
who does not have  her own children  and adopts  a  newly born child. Such  leave  shall 
be granted subject to the following conditions: – 
  (i)  the adoption should be valid under the law; 
           (ii)  the leave  shall commence  from the date  of adoption of the child and shall 
be granted for a period up to three months or till such day the child is three months old, 
whichever is earlier;    
           (iii) during the period of such leave, the Government employee shall be entitled 
to leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave; and 
           (iv) adoption leave shall not be debited to the leave account of the Government 
employee. 
(vi)  Child Care Leave 
          8.128-B. (1)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  rule  a  woman  Government 
employee  having  minor  children  below  the  age  of eighteen years,  may  be  granted 
Child Care Leave for a maximum period of one year (i.e. 365 days) during her entire 
service for taking care of two eldest surviving children, whether for rearing or to look 
after any of their needs such as examination, sickness and the like, on production of a 
documentary proof. 
          (2) Such leave may be granted in more than one spells, but it shall not be granted 
in  more  than three spells  in  a  calendar  year.  However,  it  shall  not  be  granted  for  a 
period of less than fifteen days. 
          (3)  The  grant  of  leave  under  this  rule  shall  be  subject  to  the  provisions  of  rule 
8.15.  If  the  exigencies  of public  service  so  require,  the  authority  empowered  to grant 
leave, may refuse to sanction leave to a Government employee or may cancel the leave 
already sanctioned in any case.                              
          (4)  Child  Care  Leave  shall  be sanctioned  as in  the  case of  earned  leave  and no 
Government employee shall proceed on such leave without obtaining prior approval of 
the competent authority.  

145 
[Chap. VIII] LEAVE             [8.128-B] 
          (5)  Child  Care  Leave  shall  not  be  granted  under any  circumstances  to  a 
Government  employee, who  remains  on  an  unauthorised  absence  from  duty  and 
applies for it.  
           (6) During the period of such leave, the Government employee shall be entitled 
to leave salary equal to the pay drawn immediately before proceeding on leave. 
          (7) This  Leave  shall  not  be  debited  against  the  regular  leave  account  of  the 
Government  employee.  However,  a  separate  Leave  Account  for  this Leave  shall  be 
maintained  in  a  proforma, as  may  be  specified  and  the  entries  relating  to  this  Leave 
shall be made in the Service Book of the concerned employee. 
          (8) Child   Care   Leave   shall   not   be   sanctioned   in   the   case   of   a   woman 
Government employee,– 
                (a)  sagainst  whom  a  disciplinary  proceeding  has  been  instituted  or    who  is    
under suspension; or   
                 (b) who is under probation period:  
                                Provided  that  an  authority  empowered  to  grant  leave  may  grant 
leave  to  such a  Government  employee  after  considering  a  medical 
certificate, countersigned  by  a  medical  authority  not  below  the  rank  of 
Civil Surgeon, to the effect that the  minor child is  suffering from some 
serious ailment which warrants mother‟s immediate personal care; or 
               (c)  who has been appointed on daily wages, work-charged or contract basis. 
           (9) Leave already availed or being availed of by a Government employee shall, 
under no circumstances, be converted into Child Care Leave. 
            Clarification.–(i)  Child  Care  Leave  in  connection  with  the  examination  or 
illness of a minor child living abroad, shall be sanctioned on the basis of a certificate 
issued  in  this  regard  by  the  concerned  educational institution  or  by an authorised 
doctor, as the case may be. The woman Government employee, who avails Child Care 
Leave  in  respect  of  a  minor  child  living  abroad,  shall  have  to  comply  with  all  the 
rules/instructions  for proceeding on ex-India  leave  and eighty per cent period of such 
leave shall have to be spent in the country where the child is living; 
            (ii)  before  Child  Care Leave  is  sanctioned  relating  to  the  examination  of  a 
minor child, who lives in a hostel in India or abroad, the Government employee shall 
have to clarify how the needs of such a minor child will be looked after by her;  
            (iii) Leave Travel Concession  shall not be  permitted  during  Child  Care 
Leave; and  

146 
[8.128B-8.129A] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)  [Chap.VIII] 
          (iv)  a spell, which begins during a calendar year and ends in the next calendar 
year,  shall  be  deemed  as  a  spell  pertaining  to  the  calendar  year  in  which  the  spell 
begins.   
          8.129.  Omitted.         
          8.129-A.  Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  rule  8.119,  8.133  and  8.137, 
where a  military officer not in permanent civil employ has elected  to draw civil rates 
of pay, his leave shall be regulated as follows:– 
            (a)          (i)  Instead  of  annual  leave,  he  may  be  granted  earned  leave as  
calculated under  rule  8.116  from  the  beginning  of  the  calendar  year 
following  that  in  which  he  becomes  subject  to  this  rule,  his  leave 
account  being  initially  credited  with  the  earned  leave  equal  to  the 
number of days of annual leave which, on the date on which he becomes 
subject to this rule, it would be permissible to grant him under the leave 
rules of the Armed Forces: 
                    Provided  that,  if  annual  leave  under  the  leave  rules of  the  Armed 
Forces is not admissible in respect of the calendar year of transfer, duty 
counting  for  earned  leave  shall  commence  on  the  date  on  which  he 
becomes subject to this rule: 
                    Provided  further  that  in  the  case  of  Military  Officer serving  in  a 
vacation  department  the  provisions  of  rule  8.117,  shall  apply, mutatis 
mutandis to the calculation and grant of leave: 
           Provided also that a military officer holding substantively a tenure 
post,  who is  temporarily  reverted  to  military  duty,  shall  be  treated  as  if 
he had remained subject to this rule throughout the period of his absence 
from  his  civil  post,  any  annual leave  taken  under the  leave  rules  of  the 
Armed  Forces  during  the  period  being  treated  as  earned  leave  taken 
under this rule. 
                  (ii)  He  may  also  be  granted  any  leave,  other  than  annual  leave, 
admissible  under the  leave  rules  of  the  Armed  forces  either alone  or  in 
combination with earned leave. 
   (b) The  total  period  of  leave  shall  be  regulated  by  the  limit in  force  under 
the  leave  rules  of  the  Armed  forces  to  which  the  military  officer  is 
subject. 
   (c) Leave may be retrospectively commuted by the authority which granted 
it  into  any  other  kind  of  leave  which  was  admissible  to  the  military 
officer concerned at the time it was granted: 

147 
   Chap. VIII] LEAVE [8.129A-8.129C] 
                              Provided that   except in   the case   of military officer holding 
substantively  a tenure  post, no  leave  under  clause (ii) of  sub-rule (a)  
may  be granted to  such  military officer unless the civil authority which  
grants  the  leave  is  prepared  to  re-employ  him  immediately  upon  the 
termination of the leave:                 
                  Provided further that in the case of a military officer  holding 
substantively a tenure post, leave under clause (i) of sub-rule (a) may be 
granted  so  as  to  extend  beyond  the  expiry  of  such  term  if  the  leave  has 
been applied for in sufficient time before the expiry of the fixed term and 
refused owing to the exigencies of public service. 
  (d) Any  leave  granted  under  this  rule  to  a  military  officer  holding  civil 
appointment  of  limited  tenure  shall  not  exceed  beyond  the  term  of  his 
civil appointment. 
          8.129-B.  A  military  officer  in  civil  employ  shall  cease  to  be  governed  by  rule 
8.129-A with effect from date from which he is released or discharged from the Armed 
Forces and shall with effect from the date of such release or discharge become subject 
to these rules, the earned leave due to him on that date being carried forward. 
          8.129-C. Where a military officer is appointed substantively to a permanent civil 
post (other than a tenure post) there shall be credited initially in his account– 
             (a)  (i)  earned leave equal to the number of days of the annual leave which, on 
the date he is so appointed, it would be permissible to grant him under 
the leave rules of the Armed Forces, or  
                   (ii)  earned leave, if any, which, on the date on which he is so appointed, it  
would be permissible to grant him under rule 8.129-A: 
             Provided  that  where  such  appointment  is  made  in  the  calendar 
year in which the military officer was transferred to civil employ, the 
credit   under   clause   (i)   shall   be   reduced   by   1/12
th
 of   the   duty 
intervening  between  the  date  of that  appointment  and  the  termination 
of  the  calendar year  of  transfer  but  no  reduction  shall  be  made  if 
annual  leave  is  not  admissible  in  respect  of  the  calendar  year  of 
transfer; 
    (b) half pay leave equal to the number of days of furlough which, on the date 
he  is  so  appointed,  it  would  be  permissible  to  grant  him  under  the  leave 
rules of the Armed Forces. 
 

148 
 [8.130-8.132] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
LEAVE TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES 
ON DEPUTATION OUT OF INDIA 
          8.130.  Unless   the   competent   authority   in   any   case   otherwise   directs,   the 
following  provisions  apply  to  Government  employees  placed  on  deputation  out  of 
India, if the period of the deputation exceeds one year :– 
(a)  The  period  of  deputation  shall  not  count  as  duty  for  the  purpose  of  this 
chapter. 
(b)  The  amount  of  leave  which  can  be  earned  by  the  deputation  shall  be 
determined  by  the  competent  authority.  Such  leave  can  only  be  taken 
during  the  period  of  deputation  and  will  not  be  credited  or  debited  in  the 
Government  employee‟s  leave  account.  Leave  salary  during  such  leave 
shall be equal to the rate of deputation pay: 
Provided  that  where  a  deputation  originally  sanctioned  for  one year  or  less  is 
subsequently extended so that the total period exceeds one year, these provisions shall 
apply only in respect of the period in excess of one year.  
PART B–LEAVE TO PROBATIONERS AND APPRENTICES 
                                  LEAVE TO PROBATIONERS 
          8.131. During  the  period  of  probation,  a  probationer  is  entitled  to  leave  as 
follows:– 
(1)  If appointed under contract, to such leave as is prescribed in his contract; or  
(2)   (i)  if there be no such prescription in the contract or  
(ii) if  appointed  otherwise,  to  such  leave  as  would  be  admissible  to  him 
under  the  leave  rules  which  would  be  applicable  to  him  if  he  held  his 
post  substantively  otherwise  than  on  probation.  If  for  any  reason  it  is       
proposed  to  terminate  the  services of  a  probationer,  any  leave  which 
may be granted to him should not extend beyond the date on which the 
probationary  period  as  already  sanctioned  or  extended  expires,  or  any 
earlier  date  on  which  his  services  are  terminated  by  the  order  of  an 
authority competent to appoint him. 
Note.–See also rule 8.58. 
LEAVE TO APPRENTICES 
8.132. During the  period  of  apprenticeship,  an  apprentice  is  entitled  to  leave  as 
follows: – 
  (1)  if appointed under contract, to such leave as is prescribed in his contract; or 

149 
[Chap. VIII] LEAVE       [8.132-8.133] 
        (2)  (i)  if there be no such prescription in the contract; or 
(ii)  if appointed otherwise; 
               (a) to  leave  on  medical  certificate  on  leave  salary  equivalent  to  half  of  the 
pay on the last day of duty prior to commencement of leave for a period 
not  exceeding  one  month  in  any  year  of  apprenticeship  if  the  period  of 
apprenticeship   is   less   than   one   year,   proportionate   leave   will   be 
admissible,  viz. for Nine/Six/Three  months, period of apprenticeship,      
leave admissible  will  be  twenty-one/fifteen/seven days,  respectively; 
and 
  (b)  to extraordinary leave under rules 8.121. 
          Note 1.–See also rule 8.58. 
 Note  2.–This  rule  has  reference  to  leave  earned  or  taken  during  the  apprentice  period 
only and not afterwards.  See also rule 2.16 (a) (1). 
 Note 3.–Paid candidates will be treated as apprentices for the purpose of this rule. 
 Note 4.–The  leave  at  the  credit  of  a  Government  employee  on  the  date  of  his 
appointment as an apprentice under Punjab Government should not lapse but may be allowed to 
be carried forward on his appointment to a post under Punjab Government on the expiry of the 
period of apprenticeship. 
PART C–LEAVE  EARNED  BY  TEMPORARY  AND  OFFICIATING  SERVICE, 
SERVICE  WHICH  IS  NOT  CONTINUOUS  AND  PART  TIME  SERVICE  OR 
SERVICE REMUNERATED WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY BY THE PAYMENT OF 
HONORARIA ON DAILY WAGES. 
LEAVE TO GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES NOT 
IN PERMANENT EMPLOY 
                 (i)  Earned leave, half pay leave, commuted leave and „Leave not due‟ 
          8.133. The  provisions  of  rules  8.116  to  8.119  apply  also  to  a  Government 
employee not in permanent employ, provided that– 
(a)    no  half pay  leave  shall  be  granted  unless  the  authority  competent  to 
sanction leave has reason to believe that the officer will return to duty on 
its expiry ; and 
(b)   leave  not  due  for  a  period  not  exceeding  360  days  during  the  entire 
service  shall  not  be  granted  to  such  an  employee  unless  he  is  suffering 
from   T.B.,   Leprosy,   Cancer   or   mental   illness   and   the   following 
conditions are fulfilled:–   

150 
 [8.133-8.137-A] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
   (i) that  the  Government  employee  has put in a minimum of one year‟s 
service; 
 (ii)   that the post from which the Government employee proceeds on     
         leave is likely to last till his return to duty; and 
 (iii)  the request for the grant of such leave is supported by a medical   
         certificate of the authorised Medical Attendant. 
          8.134.  Omitted. 
          8.135.  Omitted. 
          8.136. No leave    is    admissible    to    temporary    establishment    paid    from 
contingencies  on  contingent  bills.  Such  establishment  may,  however,  be allowed 
extraordinary leave under rule 8.137. 
                                      (ii) Extraordinary Leave 
          8.137.  The provisions of rule 8.121 shall also apply to a Government employee 
not  in  permanent  employment  but  the  period  of  extraordinary  leave  on  any  one 
occasion does not exceed –                                                                                                                                                                                            
(i) two  years  in  the  case  of  a  Government  employee  who  has  been  in 
continuous Government service for a period exceeding one year; and  
(ii) one  year  in  the  case  of a Government  employee  whose  service  is  less 
than  one year. 
                                        Note  1.–Where  a  Government  employee,  who  is  not  a  permanent  employee,  fails  to 
resume  duty  on  the  expiry  of  the  maximum  period  of  extraordinary  leave granted  to  him  or 
where such a Government employee who is granted a lesser amount of extraordinary leave than 
the maximum amount admissible, remains absent from duty for any period which together with 
the extraordinary leave granted exceeds the limit up to which he could have been granted such 
leave  under  this  rule,  he  shall  be  liable  to  be    removed  from  service  in  accordance  with    the 
procedure laid down in the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970. 
                                        Note 2.–The period of extraordinary leave when separated by a spell of vacation will be 
treated  as  one  continuous  spell  of  extraordinary  leave  for  applying  the limits specified  in  this 
rule. 
                                     (iii)  Maternity Leave 
          8.137-A. The  provisions  of  rule  8.127(a)  and  8.127  (b),  shall apply  also  to  a 
Government employee not in permanent employ. 
           8.137-B.  Omitted.    

151 
[Chap. VIII]   LEAVE   [8.137C-8.138A] 
                                             (iv)  Special Disability Leave 
           8.137-C.  The  provisions  of  rules  8.124  and  8.125  apply mutatis  mutandis to 
temporary  and  officiating  Government  employees  whose  leave  is  regulated  by  the 
rules in this part. 
                                                    (v)  Hospital Leave 
           8.138. (a)  The  competent  authority  under  rule  8.23  of  the  rules  may  grant 
hospital  leave  to  Head  Constables  and  Constables  of  the  Punjab  Armed  Police  Force 
and Regular Police Force, Overseers and Sub-Overseers in the Punjab Mental Hospital 
and the Establishment of the Government Press, whose leave is regulated by the Rules 
in this Part. 
           Note  1.–In  the  case  of  persons  to  whom  the  Workmen‟s  Compensation  Act,  1923, 
applies  the  amount  of  leave-salary  shall  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of  compensation  payable 
under Section 4(1)(d) of the said Act. 
         Note  2.–Industrial  and  work-charged  staff  will  also  be  entitled  to  Hospital  leave  in  the 
same manner as other state Government employees. 
          Note   3.–Hospital  leave  should  be   granted  on  the  production  by   the   Government 
employee  concerned  of  a  medical  certificate  from  a  superior  officer,  not  below  the  rank  of 
Senior  Medical Officer  to  the  effect  that  the  illness  or  injury  was  directly  due  to  the  risks 
incurred  in  the  course  of  official  duties  and  also  that  the  leave  recommended  is  necessary  to 
effect a cure. The period of leave shall be such as may be certified by the  Authorised Medical 
Attendant to be necessary. 
         (b)  Hospital  leave  may  be  granted  on  leave  salary  equal  to  either  pay  drawn 
immediately before proceeding on earned leave or half pay and for such period, as the 
authority granting it may consider necessary. 
          (c) Hospital leave is not debited against the leave account and may be combined 
with any other leave which may be admissible: provided that the total period of leave, 
after such combination, shall not exceed 28 months. 
(vi)  Terminal Leave 
          8.138-A.  (1)  Earned  leave  to  the  extent due  and  admissible  at  a  time  can  be 
granted to temporary employees (other than those employed on a contract basis) at the 
discretion  of  the  sanctioning  authority  on  the  termination  of  service  on  account  of 
retrenchment  or  on  the  abolition  of  posts  before attaining  the  age  of  superannuation 
even  when  it  has  not  been applied  for  and  refused in the  public  interest.  In  all  cases, 
however, where any notice of termination of service is required to be given under the 
terms  of  employment  of  the  temporary  employee  concerned, and that employee is 
relieved  before  the  expiry  of  the  notice,  such  notice  or  the  unexpired  portion  thereof 
should run concurrently with the leave granted. 

152 
 [8.138A] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
          (2)  Such terminal leave may also be granted to– 
                (a)  re-employed pensioners who are treated as “new entrants” in the matter 
of leave, subject to the condition that such pensioners will not be entitled 
to  draw their  pension  during  the  terminal leave  if  the  pension  was  held 
in abeyance during the period of re-employment; 
                (b)  persons employed for a period exceeding one year on a contract basis in  
                       terms  of  Appendix  16  to  the  Punjab  Civil Services Rules, Volume I,   
                       Part II. 
         (c)   unqualified persons  who  may  have  to vacate their temporary posts                       
                 to make room for qualified candidates. 
         (d)   persons whose services  may  have  to  be dispensed with, as  a  matter  
                of administrative  convenience  as    an  alternative   to  the  initiation of 
disciplinary proceedings against them. 
         Note   1.–This   rule   shall   not   apply   to   apprentices   and persons   in   non-continuous 
employment of Government who will continue to be governed by the normal rules applicable to 
them. 
           Note 2.–Terminal  leave  under  this  rule   will  not  be  admissible  in   the following 
circumstances:– 
      (i)   where  the  employee concerned has been dismissed or removed  from service, or  
where service is terminated in the interest of national security ; or 
    (ii)   where  the  employee  concerned  resigns  his  post  of  his  own  volition  unless  the 
resignation  is  for  reason  of  ill-health  or  for  other  reasons  beyond  his  control. 
Leave  not  exceeding  half  the  amount  of  earned  leave  which  the  Government 
employee concerned can avail of at a time may, however, at the discretion of the 
sanctioning authority, be allowed in this case; 
(iii)   where the services of a temporary Government employee are lent by commercial 
concerns or semi-Government organisations on terms which include the payment 
of leave salary contribution, the grant of leave on termination of the employment 
under Government will in such cases, be at the cost and within the discretion of 
the parent employer. 
            Note 3.–It will not be necessary to extend the temporary post to cover the period of the 
leave granted to a Government employee at the end of his temporary employment. 
            Note 4.–Retrenched Government employees who are re-employed either in their own or 
another  department  on or before the expiry of their terminal leave with no break in service are 
to be deemed to be in continuous Government service and allowed the benefit of their previous 
service for calculating casual and earned leave due to them on their re-employment. 

153 
 [Chap. VIII] LEAVE    [8.138A-8.141] 
           Note 5.– Omitted. 
                                 Note  6.–A  temporary Government  employee  continues  in  service  during  that  part  of 
terminal  leave  only  which  runs  concurrently  with  the  notice  period  and  ceases  to  be  a 
Government  service  on  the  expiry  of  the  notice  period,  the  leave  to  the  extent  it  goes  beyond 
the notice period being treated as a terminal benefit only. 
          (vii)  Leave beyond the date of retirement and encashment of leave 
          8.139.  The  provisions  of  rule  8.21  apply mutatis  mutandis to  temporary  and 
officiating Government employees whose leave is regulated by the rules in this Part. 
  (viii) Leave Salary 
          8.140. The provisions of rule 8.122 shall apply mutatis mutandis in the case of a 
Government employee governed by the rules in this part. 
         Note.– Omitted. 
  LEAVE ADMISSIBLE TO PART TIME GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES AND 
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES WHOSE SERVICE IS NOT CONTINUOUS 
  LAW OFFICERS 
(i)  Assistant Legal Remembrancers 
          8.141.  An  Assistant Legal  Remembrancer  whose  pay  is  fixed  at a  definite  rate 
but his whole-time is not retained for the service of Government, may be granted leave 
as follows:– 
  (a)   Leave  on full  pay  during  the  vacation  of  the  High  Court;  provided  that  no 
extra expense is hereby caused to Government; such leave will be counted 
as duty. 
  (b)   Leave  on  half  pay  for  not  more  than  six  months  once  only  in  his  service  
after six years of duty. 
  (c)   On medical certificate  leave  on half pay up to the  maximum of 12 months 
during  whole  service.  When  the  maximum  of  12  months  is  exhausted, 
further leave  on  medical  certificate  not  exceeding  6  months  in  all  may  be 
granted in exceptional cases on the recommendation of a medical board. 
  (d)   On the conditions prescribed in rule 8.121 extraordinary leave. 
         Note.–Leave under any one of the clauses of this rule may be combined with leave under 
other clause. 

154 
[8.142] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
                          (ii)  District Attorneys and Government Pleaders 
          8.142. (a) (1) District   Attorneys   will   ordinarily   be   permitted   to   absent 
themselves  from  their  duties  during  the  period  for  which  the  court  of  the  Sessions 
Judge is closed for the summer vacation, upto a maximum of one month if the State of 
work  permits;  but  such  permission  may  be  withdrawn  by  the  Director  of  Prosecution 
and Litigation when the work so requires.  In these cases, it should not be necessary to 
appoint  any  other  person  to  perform  the  duties  of  the  District  Attorney,  who  will  be 
permitted to draw his consolidated monthly fees for the period of his absence. 
           (2) When a District Attorney is refused permission to absent himself from duty 
during  the  period of  the  Sessions  Court‟s  vacation,  he  may,  with  the  sanction  of 
Government, be permitted to absent himself from duty at some other time of the year 
for a period not exceeding one month, during which time he will continue to draw his 
consolidated monthly fees.  
           (3) Apart from the concession in clause (2) a District Attorney may be permitted 
by the Director of Prosecution and Litigation to absent himself from  his  duties at any 
time of the year up to a period of three months, or for a longer period with the sanction 
of  the  Government,  during  which  time  he  will  not  be  entitled  to  any  remuneration 
other than that provided in clause (6) below. 
         (4)  During the absence from duty of a District Attorney under the provisions of 
any  of  the above  clauses  arrangements  may  be  made  by  the  Director  of  Prosecution 
and Litigation for the discharge of his duties by another legal practitioner. The Director 
of  Prosecution  and  Litigation  may  engage  a  private  practitioner  either  on  fees  for 
individual  cases  at the  rates  fixed  by  Government  for  the  employment  of  private 
practitioners for criminal case work or on consolidated fees not exceeding the monthly 
rate fixed by the Government, whichever alternative is in the opinion of the Director of 
Prosecution   &   Litigation   most   economical   and   conducive   to   efficiency.   Such 
appointments   will   be made   by   the   Director   of   Prosecution   and   Litigation   in 
consultation with the local authorities. 
          (5)   If no suitable legal practitioner is willing to do the work on the monthly rate 
fixed  by  the  Government or  if  the  appointment  of  a  private  practitioner  on  fees  does 
not  appear  appropriate  or  economical, the  Deputy  Commissioner  should  refer  the 
matter  with  his  recommendations  to  the  Director  of  Prosecution  &  Litigation  for  the 
orders of Government. 
          (6)  If  the  period  of  absence  (other  than  any  period  during  which  the  District 
Attorney is entitled to draw full fees) does not exceed one month, the District Attorney 
may be allowed to draw the difference, if any, between the rate fixed for his fees and 
the sum paid to his substitute or substitutes. 

155 
 [Chap. VIII] LEAVE       [8.142-8.144] 
           (7)  When the same District Attorney is attached to more districts than one, the 
Deputy Commissioner of each district concerned must be consulted. 
          (b) (i) Government Pleaders must arrange that their services are  available at all 
times,  other  than  the  period  of  the  vacation  fixed  for  subordinate  civil  courts,  unless 
permission of absence has been given. 
           (ii)   Government   Pleaders   who   are   not   District   Attorneys   may   be   given 
permission of absence at any time of the year; provided that they can be spared.  Such 
permission must be obtained from the Director of Prosecution & Litigation through the 
Deputy Commissioner. 
          Editor and Reporters of the Indian Law Reports 
          8.143.  The  Editor  and  Reporters  engaged  in  the  production  of  the  Indian  Law 
Reports  (Punjab  Series)  who  are  part-time  Government  employees  earn  leave  upto 
1/12
th
 of  the  period  spent  on  duty.  They  can  be  granted  leave  up  to  the  maximum  of 
120 days at any one time and will be allowed leave salary equal to the pay on the day 
before   the   leave   commences;   provided   no   extra   expense   is   thereby   caused   to 
Government.                                         
                                                 Departmental Sub-Registrar 
          8.144. Subject to the deduction of the amount of leave actually enjoyed from the 
amount of leave which has been earned a Departmental Sub-Registrar may be granted 
leave as follows:– 
(i)   Leave with pay– 
                   (a)  Leave  on  full  pay  not  exceeding  one  year  in  the  whole  of  his  service  
upto 1/12
th
 of the period spent on duty subject to the conditions that– 
                         (1)  Leave  earned  cannot  at  any  one  time  be  granted  to  an  extent    
greater than 120 days; and 
                         (2)  Of  leave  so  granted  1½  months  will  be  leave without  medical 
certificate and the rest on medical certificate. 
                   (b)  Leave on medical certificate on half pay for not more than six months 
during his service after the completion of six years of duty. 
 (ii)     Leave without pay– 
       (a)  without medical certificate, for a period not exceeding one year during  
the whole of his service; a Sub-Registrar who is also a member  of  the  
Union  Parliament  or  States  Legislature  may  in  addition be granted            

156 
  [8.144-8.148] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.VIII] 
               leave   for   the   period   he   actually   attends   the   meetings   of   such 
Parliament or Legislature or of its Sub-Committee. 
                     (b)  On medical certificate, without any limit. 
          (iii)  Any combination of leave  under clauses (i) (a), (i) (b) and (ii) (a), (ii) (b); 
provided that no combination under clauses (i) (a), (i) (b) and (ii) (a) at any 
one time exceeds one year. 
       LEAVE ADMISSIBLE  TO  GOVERNMENT  EMPLOYEES  REMUNERATED         
WHOLLY   OR   PARTIALLY   BY   THE   PAYMENT   OF   HONORARIA   OR 
DAILY WAGES 
          8.145. A Government employee remunerated by honoraria may be granted leave 
on the terms laid down in rule 8.141; provided that he makes satisfactory arrangements 
for  the  performance  of  his  duties  that  no  extra  expense  is caused  to  Government  and 
that during leave of the kind contemplated by clause (b) of rule 8.141, the whole of the 
honoraria are paid to the person who officiates in his post. 
          8.146. Leave to – 
    (1)   A section-writer or a temporary press employee, paid under the piece work 
system, or a daily labourer, employed in the Public Works Department, if 
granted  leave,  is  not  entitled  to  any  leave  salary  whatever  during  his 
absence. 
(2)  Labourers employed on a daily wages in Government workshops, power-
houses,  quarries;  electric  sub-stations  and  other similar  institutions,  or  on 
demolition of buildings, or on blasting operations or roads, or on a power       
line, a telephone line, a haulageway in the Public Works Department, who 
are  injured  while  on  duty,  may  be  granted  leave  while  under  medical 
treatment  for  the  injury;  provided  that  the  injury  is  directly  due  to  risks 
incurred  in  the  course  of  their  official  duties.  The  total  amount  of  such 
leave  in  any  one  term  of  3  years  shall  not  exceed  six  months, full  wages 
being   allowed   for  the   first   three   months   and   half   wages   thereafter         
inclusive  of  compensation  under  the  Workmen‟s  Compensation  Act, 
where such compensation is payable. 
          8.147. Omitted.                      
                     LEAVE  RULES  APPLICABLE TO  PERMANENT SALARIED 
                     INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYEES IN THE PUNJAB GOVERNMENT 
                     GROUP „C‟ AND GROUP „D‟ 
          8.148.  (1) Leave to  permanent  Group  „C‟  and  Group  „D‟  salaried  industrial 
employees shall be admissible in accordance with the provisions of Rule 8.116.  

157 
    [Chap. VIII] LEAVE      [8.148-8.149] 
          (2) The  half pay leave  admissible  to an  employee in respect of each  completed 
year of service is 20 days and will be accumulative.  The half pay leave due may be 
granted to an employee on medical certificate or on private affairs. 
 (3)  Leave without pay may be granted when no other leave is admissible. 
 (4) The  provisions  of  rule  8.119  (c)  and  (d)  apply  to  Government  employees 
whose  leave  is  regulated  by  the  rules  in  this  part  except  that  leave  not  due  will  be 
granted only on medical certificate. 
 (5)  Injury  leave  at  half  pay  rates  may  be  granted  to  a  permanent  salaried 
industrial employee, below the grade of Overseer or General Foreman who is injured 
in circumstances which would have given rise to a claim for compensation under the 
Workmen‟s  Compensation  Act,  1923  (VIII  of  1923),  if  he  had  been  a  workman  as 
defined therein, whether or not proviso (a) to sub-section (1) of section 3 of that Act 
is  applicable. In  the  case  of  workers  who  are  declared  to  be  suffering  from  lead 
poisoning  by  certifying  Surgeon,  injury  leave  will  be  admissible  on  full  pay.         
Such leave shall not be  deemed  to be leave on medical certificate for the purpose  of 
clause (2). It shall be granted from the commencement of disablement for so long as 
is necessary subject  to  a  limit  of two  years  for any  one  disability  and  a  limit  of  five 
years  during  an  employee‟s  total  service  including  service,  if  any,  on  the  piece 
establishment.  The salary  payable  in  respect  of  a  period  of  leave  granted  under  this 
rule  shall  in  the  case  of  an  employee  to  whom  the  provisions  of  the  Workmen‟s 
Compensation Act,  1923,  (VIII of  1923),  apply  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of 
compensation paid under clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 4 of that Act. 
           Note.–The  expression  “pay” in  this  rule  means  the  pay  on  the  day  before  the  leave 
commences. 
LEAVE     RULES     APPLICABLE     TO     OFFICIATING     TEMPORARY 
INDUSTRIAL EMPLOYEES OF PUNJAB GOVERNMENT PRESS, GROUP 
„C‟ and GROUP „D‟. 
          8.149.  (1)  The  competent  authority  under  rule  8.23  of  these  rules  may  grant 
hospital leave to a Group „D‟ Government employee and such Group „C‟ Government 
employees   whose   duties   involve handling   of   dangerous   machinery,   explosive 
materials,  poisonous  drug  etc. or  the  performance  of  hazardous  tasks,  while  under 
medical treatment  for illness  or injury  if  such  illness or injury  is  directly  due  to risks 
incurred in the course of their official duties. 
         Note 1.–In the case of person to whom the Workmen‟s Compensation Act, 1923 applies, 
the  amount  of  leave-salary  shall  be  reduced  by  the  amount  of  compensation  payable  under 
section 4(1)(d) of the said Act. 
                                       Note  2.–Industrial  and  Work-charged  staff  will  also  be  entitled  to  hospital  leave  in  the 
same manner as other State Government employees. 

158 
[8.149] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. VIII] 
           Note  3.–Hospital  leave  should  be  granted  on  the  production  by  the  Government 
employee  concerned  of  a  medical  certificate,  from  a  superior  officer,  not  below  the  rank  of 
Senior Medical Officer to the effect that the illness or injury was directly due to risks incurred 
in  the  course  of  official  duties  and  also  that  the  leave  recommended  is  necessary  to  effect  a 
cure.  The  period  of  the  leave  shall  be  such  as  may  be  certified  by  the  Authorised  Medical 
Attendant to be necessary. 
           8.149. (2)  Hospital  leave  may  be  granted  on  leave  salary  equal  to  either  pay 
drawn immediately before proceeding on earned leave or half pay and for such period 
as the authority granting it may consider necessary. 
           8.149. (3)  Hospital  leave  is  not  debited  against  the  leave  account  and  may  be 
combined with any other leave which may be admissible; provided that the total period 
of leave, after such combination, shall not exceed 28 months. 
            8.149. (4) Provisions of sub-rules (a), (b) and (c) of rule 8.119, rule 8.137 and 
sub-rule (1) of rule 8.148 ibid shall apply mutatis mutandis. 
 
 
 

159 
                                                          CHAPTER IX  
  JOINING TIME 
CONDITIONS UNDER WHICH ADMISSIBLE 
          9.1. Joining time may be granted to a Government employee to enable him– 
    (a)   to  join  a  new  post  either  at  the  same  or  new  station,  without  availing 
himself  of  any leave on relinquishing charge of his old post; 
    (b)   to join a new post in a new station on return from– 
    (i) earned  leave  not  exceeding  180  days,  in  respect  of  Government 
employees  subject  to  the  Leave  Rules  in  Section  III  of  Chapter 
VIII; 
(ii)   leave  other  than  that  specified  in  sub-clause  (i)  when  he  has  not 
had sufficient notice of his appointment to new post; 
  (c) (i) to proceed  on transfer or on the  expiry of leave  from  a  specified 
station  to join  a  post  in  a place  in  a  remote  locality which  is  not 
easy of access; 
(ii)   to proceed, on relinquishing charge of a post on transfer or leave, 
in  a  place  in  a  remote  locality  which  is  not  easy  of  access to  a 
specified station.  
         Note  1.–The  authority  which  granted  the  leave  will  decide  whether  the  notice  referred 
to in clause (b) (ii) was insufficient. 
           Note  2.–The  joining  time  and  travelling  allowance  of  military  officers  in  civil  employ 
are governed by the civil rules in virtue of the provisions of paragraph 593 of the Regulations 
for  the  Army  in  India  (Rules)  and  paragraph  2  (iii)  and  14  of  the  Defence  Services 
Regulations,  India  Passage  Regulations,  respectively,  read  with  Fundamental  Rule  3. These 
rules  admit  of  the  grant  of  joining  time  and  travelling  allowance  to  military  officers  in  civil 
employ  not  only  on  the  occasion  of  their  transfer  to  civil  employ  and  retransfer  to  military 
employ but also when they are actually serving in the civil employ.  For the purposes of these 
rules,  privilege  leave  under  the  military  leave  rules,  should  be  treated  as  earned  leave  of  not 
more than four months‟ duration.   
          Note 3.–The time reasonably required for journeys between the place of training and the 
stations to which a Government employee is posted immediately before and after the period of 
training  should  be  treated  as  part  of  the  training  period.  This  does  not  apply  to  probationers 
holding “training posts” which they may be considered as taking with them on transfer.  Such 
probationers are entitled to joining time when transferred. 
         Note  4.–When a Government employee holding a  temporary post is offered through his 
official superior another such post at some other station at any time before the abolition of his 
post, he is entitled to joining time. 

160 
 [9.1-9.4] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)    [Chap. IX] 
          Note  5.–No joining time, joining time  pay or travelling allowance shall be  granted to a 
State Government employee who is appointed to a post under the Union Government but joins 
his  new  post  after  termination  of  his  employment  under  the  State  Government  by  resignation 
or  otherwise,  unless  the  employment  of  a  particular  Government  employee  is  in  the  wider 
public interest. The same applies to a employee of the Union Government or of another State 
Government   who,   in   similar   circumstances,   is   appointed   to   a   post   under the   Punjab 
Government.  Further, when a Government employee of one department is appointed to a post 
in  another  department,  both  departments  being  under  the  Punjab  Government,  but  joins  his 
new  post  after  termination  of  his  employment  under  the  old  departments,  no  joining  time, 
joining time pay or travelling allowance shall be allowed unless it is in the public interest to do 
so.  If joining time is allowed in any case it should be the minimum necessary and should in no 
case exceed the transit period. 
          Note   6.–Joining  time,  joining  time  pay  and  travelling  allowance  of  Government 
employees  appointed  to  posts  under  the  Punjab  Government  on  the  results  of  a  Competitive 
Examination, which is open to both Government employees and others, is regulated as under:– 
        (a)  travelling allowance, joining time and joining time pay should ordinarily be  allowed 
to  all  Government  employees  serving  under  the  Union  or  State  Government  who 
hold permanent post in a substantive capacity. 
         (b)   no travelling allowance, joining time pay should be granted in the case of those who 
are employed in a temporary capacity without the sanction of Government. 
             (c)  for  the  purpose  of  clause  (a)  above  provisionally  permanent  and  quasi-permanent 
Government  employees  shall  be  treated  as  on  par  with  the  permanent  Government 
employees. 
          9.2. No  joining  time  is  allowed  in  cases  when  a  Government  employee  is 
transferred from one post to another in the same office establishment.  
          9.3. (a)  A  Government  employee  on  transfer  during  a  vacation  may  be 
permitted to take joining time at the end of the vacation.  
 (b) If vacation is combined with leave, joining time shall be regulated under rule 
9.1(b) (i), if the total period of leave on average pay and vacation or earned leave and 
vacation combined is of not more than six months or 180 days duration, respectively. 
          9.4.  If  a  Government  employee  takes  leave  while  in  transit  from  one  post  to 
another,  the  period  which  has  elapsed  since  he  handed  over  charge  of  his  old  post 
must be  included in his leave.  On the expiry of the leave,  the  Government employee 
may be allowed normal joining time.   

161 
[Chap. IX] JOINING TIME                       [9.5] 
CALCULATION OF JOINING TIME 
          9.5.  The  joining  time  of  a  Government  employee  in  cases  involving  a  transfer 
from one station to another, neither of which is in a remote locality not easy of access, 
is  subject  to  a  maximum  of  30  days.  Six  days  are  allowed  for  preparation  and  in 
addition, a period to cover the actual journey calculated as follows:– 
           (a)  A Government employee is allowed:– 
                     (i)  For the portion of                            Actual time occupied in  
                           the journey which he                       the journey 
                           travels by air craft. 
                     (ii) For the portion of                            One day for each 
                           the journey which he  
                           travels or might 
                           travel. 
                      By railway                                                   ... 500 kilometers     
                                                                                                     
                      By ocean steamer                    ... 350 kilometers     or any longer         
                      By river steamer                      ... 150 kilometers     time actually                                                                                        
                                                                                occupied in 
                                                                                                         the journey.                                                                             
                      By motor vehicle or                                   
                      horse-drawn conveyance                             ...   150 kilometers 
                      In any other way                                          ...    25 kilometers 
 
 (b) (i) For purpose of journey by air under clause (a) (i) a part of day should 
be treated as one day. 
                  (ii)  a  day  is  also  allowed  for  any  fractional  portion  of  any  distance 
prescribed in clause (a) (ii). 
 (c) when  part  of  the  journey  is  by  steamer,  the  limit  of  six  days  for 
preparation  may  be  extended  to  cover  any  period  unavoidably  spent 
in awaiting the departure of the steamer. 
           Note.–If a steamer is not due to start immediately after the expiry of six days from the 
day when the Government employee, gives over charge, the Government employee may add to 
his  joining  time  the  number  of  days  intervening  between  the  expiry  of  the  six  days  and  the 
departure of the next steamer, whether he actually starts during the first six days or by the next 
boat after their expiry. 

162 
 [9.5-9.8] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)    [Chap. IX] 
 (d)    travel by road not exceeding eight kilometers to or from a railway station, 
or  steamer  ghat  at  the  beginning  or  end  of  journey  does  not  count  for 
joining time. 
(e)    a Sunday does not count as a day for the purpose of the calculations in this 
rule but Sundays are included in the maximum period of 30 days. 
         Exception.–The  authority sanctioning the  transfer may in special circumstances 
reduce the period of joining time admissible under this rule. 
         9.6.   Not  more  than  one  day  is  allowed  to  a  Government  employee  in  order to 
join  a  new  post  when  the  appointment  to  such  post  does  not  necessarily,  involve  a 
change  of  residence  from  one  station  to  another.  A  holiday  counts  as  a  day  for  the 
purpose of this rule. 
         9.6-A. When holiday (s) follow (s) joining time, the normal joining time may be 
deemed to have been extended to cover such holiday (s). 
         9.7.   Except  in  the  case  of  a  journey  performed  by air  which  will  be  governed 
by  the  provisions  in  clause  (a)  (i)  of  rule  9.5  by  whatever  route  a  Government 
employee  actually  travels  his  joining  time  shall,  unless  a  competent  authority  for 
special reasons otherwise order, be calculated by the route which travellers ordinarily 
use. 
          9.8. (a) The joining time of a Government employee under clause (b) (i) and (ii) 
of rule 9.1 will be counted from his old station or from the place at which he receives 
the order of appointment, whichever calculation will entitle him to less joining time. If 
the  leave  is  being  spent  out  of  India  and  the  order  of  appointment  to  the  new  post 
reaches him before he arrives at the port of debarkation, the port of debarkation is the 
place in which he received the order for the purpose of this rule.  If, however, such a 
Government  employee  actually  performs  the  journey  to  his  old  headquarters  for 
winding  up  his  personal  affairs,  etc.  his  joining  time  will  be  calculated  from  the  old 
headquarters to the new headquarters, irrespective of the place where he spends leave 
or  receives  posting  orders.  A  certificate  to  the  effect  that  the  Government  employee 
had  actually  performed  the journey  from  the  station where  he  was  spending  leave  to 
the old headquarters for winding up personal affairs should be furnished by the officer 
concerned with his  charge report for assumption of the  post at the new headquarters. 
The responsibility for obtaining the certificate from a Group „A‟ or  Group „B‟ officer 
would rest with the Head of Department concerned and for Group „C‟ and Group „D‟ 
staff, with the head of office. 

163 
[Chap. IX] JOINING TIME              [9.8-9.12] 
         (b) A Government employee taking joining time under clause (b) (i) of rule 9.1 
who receives, while on leave (whether spent in or out of India); order of transfer to a 
station  other  than  that  from  which  he  took  leave,  will  be  granted  full  joining  time 
admissible  under  clause  (a)  above,  without  reference  to  the  authority  which  granted 
the leave  and irrespective of the  date on which the orders  of transfer are received  by 
him.    Should  he  join  his  new  appointment  before  the  expiry  of  such  leave  plus  the 
joining  time  admissible  the  period  short  taken  should  be  considered  as  leave  not 
enjoyed,  and  a  corresponding  portion  of  the  leave  sanctioned  should  be  cancelled 
without  any  reference  to  the  authority  which  granted  the  leave.  If  in  any  case,  the 
Government  employee  desires  not  to  avail  himself  of  the  full  period  of  joining  time 
admissible  the  period  of  leave  and  joining  time  should  be  adjusted  with  reference  to 
such option. 
          9.9.  Omitted. 
         9.10. If  a  Government  employee  is  authorised  to  make  over  charge  of  a  post 
elsewhere than at his headquarters, his joining time shall be calculated from the place 
at which he actually makes over charge. 
          9.10-A. If the headquarter of a Government employee, while on tour is changed 
to the tour station itself, or his temporary transfer is converted into permanent transfer 
by  the  competent  authority,  his  joining  time   may  be  calculated  from  the  old 
headquarters, to the new headquarters, in case he actually performs the journey to his 
old headquarters for winding up his household etc. 
          9.11. If a Government employee is appointed to a new post while in transit from 
one  post  to  another,  his  joining  time  begins  on  the  day  following  that  on  which  he 
receives the order of appointment. 
           Note.–A second period of six days for preparation should not be included in calculating 
the  joining  time  of a  Government  employee  whose  appointment  is  changed  while  he  is  in 
transit. 
          9.12. When  a  Government  employee  under  the  administrative  control  of  the 
Punjab  Government  is  transferred  to  the  control  of  another  Government,  his  joining 
time for the journey to join his post under that Government and for the return will be 
governed by the rules of that Government. 
          9.13 and 9.14. Omitted. 

164 
[9.15] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)    [Chap. IX] 
 PAY DURING JOINING TIME 
          9.15. A Government employee on joining time shall be regarded as on duty, and 
shall be entitled to be paid as follows:– 
(a)  where joining time is granted under clause (a) of rule 9.1 the pay which he 
would have drawn if he had continued in the old post; or the pay which he 
will draw on taking charge of the new post, whichever is less; 
(b)  where the joining time is granted under clause (b) of rule 9.1– 
     (i) if  it  is  in  continuation  of  leave  which  included  a  period  of  leave  on            
average  pay  of  earned  leave  pay  equal  to  leave-salary  which  he  last 
drew  during  such  leave  on  average  pay  or  earned  leave  at  the  rate 
prescribed for payment of leave salary in India; and  
    (ii)  if it is in continuation of leave which did not include a period of earned 
leave-pay  equal  to  the  leave  salary  which  the  Government  employee 
would have drawn under the leave rules applicable to him as if he had 
been on leave on average pay or earned leave in India for the period of 
joining time; 
  (c)        where  joining  time  is granted  under  clause  (c)  of  rule  9.1, the pay  
which  he would draw in his post in the remote locality: 
Provided that:– 
    (i)   a Government employee on transfer shall not be entitled to any pay for 
the period of joining time unless his transfer is in the interest of public 
service; 
    (ii)   no joining  time  pay  shall  be  granted  to  a  Government  employee  who 
does  not  hold  a  permanent  post  under  Government  (including  the 
central  and  State  Governments)  in  a  substantive  capacity  or a  post 
under the Punjab Government in a quasi-permanent capacity, when he 
is appointed to a new post on the results of a competitive examination 
or interview which is open to both Government employees and others. 
           Note 1.–A Government employee on transfer is not entitled to be paid while on joining 
time unless his transfer is made in the public interest.  
           In such cases the Government employee may be granted regular leave by the competent 
authority  under  the  leave rules  admissible  to  him  even  if  the  transfer  is  at  his  own  request  to 
cover the period after handing over charge at the old station and before taking over at another, 
if the Government employee applies for it and the competent authority is willing to sanction it. 
In  case,  however,  where  the  Government  employee  does  not  apply  for  leave  to  cover  the 
period  spent  in  transit,  this  period  should  be  treated  as  “dies  non”  for  purposes  of  leave, 
increment and pension. 

165 
[Chap. IX] JOINING TIME            [9.15-9.16] 
         Note 2.–A military officer subject to the Military Leave Rules who retains a lien on his 
civil post is entitled on joining time, under sub-clause (ii) of clause (b) above, to draw the same 
amount  of  leave  salary  which  he  would  have  drawn  had  he taken  leave  under  Civil  Leave 
Rules: Provided that such leave-salary shall not be less than that which he actually drew during 
the last portion of his leave. 
         9.16.  In the Public Works Department no extra pay (where the transfer involves 
the grant of extra pay) can be drawn in any case by a relieving Government employee 
until the transfer is complete, but as far as ordinary pay and allowances are concerned 
an  exception  may  be  made  to  the  general  rule  in  all  cases  in  which  the  charge  to  be 
transferred  (whether  a  division,  a  sub-division,  or  other  charge)  consists  of  several 
scattered  works  which  the  relieving  and  the  relieved  Government  employee  are 
required, by the orders of a superior officer, to inspect together before the transfer can 
be  completed.  The  relieving  Government  employee  will  be  considered  as  on  duty  if 
the   period   taken   in   carrying   out   these inspections is   not   considered   by   the 
Superintending  Engineer  to  be  excessive.  While  so  taking  over  charge,  the  relieving 
Government employee will draw:– 
               (i) if   he   is   transferred   from   a   post   which   he   holds   substantively   his 
presumptive pay in that post; 
         (ii)    if he is transferred from a post which he has held in an officiating capacity, 
the officiating pay admissible in that post : provided it is not more than the 
pay   he   would   draw after   the   transfer   is   complete; otherwise   his 
presumptive  pay  in  the  permanent  post  on  which  he  had  a  lien  prior  to 
transfer; 
        (iii)   if he returns from leave, his pay during the period of taking over charge be 
regulated as follows:– 
(a)  if   he   went   on   leave   while   working   in   the   post   held   by   him 
substantively, the presumptive pay of that post; and 
(b)  if he went on leave while working in a post in an officiating capacity, 
the  officiating pay of that post or the pay which  will be  admissible to 
him in the new post, after taking over charge, whichever is less. 
           Note 1.–The concession of house-rent allowance or free quarter ordinarily admissible to 
a  Government  employee  should  be  treated  as  “ordinary  pay  and  allowances”  within  the 
meaning  of  this  rule  and  is  admissible  to  both  the  relieved  and  the  relieving  Government 
employees during the period occupied by them in handing over and taking over charge. 

166 
[9.16-9.17] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)    [Chap. IX] 
          Note 2.–In each case where it has been decided to treat the period of taking over charge 
of a relieving officer as „duty‟ under the provisions of this rule, a declaration in the following 
proforma should be issued:– 
DECLARATION 
                      I,___________ (Name)___________(Designation) declare that 
Shri________________  (Name and designation of the officer to be relieved) and 
Shri_____________ (Name  of  the  relieving  officer)___________ (Designation) 
were engaged in joint  inspection of several scattered works and/or stores during 
the period from  _______ to _______in connection with handing over and taking 
over  charge  and  I  do  not  consider  the  above  period  as  excessive  during  which 
Shri___________  shall be treated as on duty.                     
                                                                                       (Name of the relieving officer) 
    Station.                                                                  Name 
 Date.                                                                  Designation. 
 
          9.17. The application of rule 9.16 which forms an exception to the general rule 
and which concerns the Public Works Department only, has also been extended to the 
transfer of charge specified in column 2 of the table below in the case of the following 
departments. The authority noted in column 3 against each is to determine whether the 
period spent in completing the transfer of charge is not excessive:– 
Name of the 
Department 
Charges to be transferred Authority competent to 
determine whether the 
period spent in completing 
the transfer of charge is 
not excessive 
1. 
 
Jail Department 
  
Deputy Superintendents 
and Storekeepers. 
Inspector-General of 
Prisons, Punjab. 
Senior Factory Assistant, 
Reformatory Settlement, 
Amritsar. 
Ditto 

167 
[Chap. IX]   JOINING TIME                   [9.17] 
   
Name of the 
Department 
Charges to be transferred Authority competent to 
determine whether the 
period spent in completing 
the transfer of charge is 
not excessive 
2. Industries 
Department 
  
  
  
Teachers and clerks holding 
charge of Stores in the 
Government Industrial 
Schools and Institutions. 
Director of Industrial 
Training. 
Storekeepers in the 
Government Central 
Weaving Institute, 
Amritsar; School of Arts, 
Government Institute of 
Dyeing and Calico-Printing 
and Demonstration 
Weaving Factory, 
Ludhiana. 
Director of Industries. 
Lady Superintendent and 
Head Mistresses who hold 
charge of Stock and Stores 
in Government Women 
Industrial Schools. 
Director of Industries. 
Storekeepers and Clerks in 
Government Tanning 
Institute, Jalandhar, 
Government Hosiery 
Institute, Ludhiana 
Marketing Sections, Wool 
Section and Sericulture 
Section.  Laboratory 
Assistants in the Industrial 
Research Laboratory, 
Demonstrators of all 
Demonstration parties in 
 the Punjab. 
Ditto 

168 
[9.17]    THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)       [Chap. IX] 
   
Name of the 
Department 
Charges to be transferred Authority competent to 
determine whether the 
period spent in completing 
the transfer of charge is not 
excessive 
3. Agriculture 
Department 
Storekeepers, Well Super-
visors and Well Borers in 
Workshops and Well 
Boring Section and 
Agriculture Assistants and 
Clerks attached to Farms. 
Director of Agriculture. 
4. Veterinary 
Department 
Veterinary Inspector and 
Veterinary Officer in-
charge of Civil Veterinary 
Hospitals. 
Divisional Superintendent, 
Civil Veterinary Department 
5. Judicial 
Department 
  
Ahlmads and Record-
keepers in the Courts of 
District and Sessions 
Judges including Additional 
District and Sessions 
Judges. 
District and Sessions 
Judges  concerned  upto  10 
days. 
Ahlmads, Execution 
Moharrirs, Guardian 
Moharrirs in the Court of 
Senior and other 
Subordinate Judges and 
administrative Subordinate 
Judges and Readers to 
Administrative Subordinate 
Judges, Ahlmads, Naib, 
Shariff incharge of 
Execution Work and 
Insolvency Clerk in Small 
Cause Courts. 
Presiding   Officer   of the 
Court   up   to   7   days   and 
District    Sessions    Judges 
upto 10 days. 
  

169 
[Chap. IX] JOINING TIME          [9.17-9.19] 
   
Name of the 
Department 
Charges to be transferred Authority competent to 
determine whether the period 
spent in completing the 
transfer of charge is not 
excessive 
6. Food and 
Supplies 
Department 
Inspectors, Food and 
Supplies/Sub-Inspectors, 
Food and Supplies. 
Head    of    the Department:    
Provided    the    total    period 
spent in the transfer of charge 
does not exceed four days. 
7. Treasuries and 
Accounts 
Branch,  
Finance 
Department 
Treasury Officer, District 
Treasurers and Assistant/ 
Sub-Treasurers. 
Head of Department. 
8. Treasuries and 
Accounts 
Branch, 
Department of 
Finance. 
District Treasury  
Officer. 
Head of Department upto two 
days. 
9. Printing & 
Stationery 
Department 
Store-Keepers. Head of Department provided 
the total period spent in 
transfer of charge does not 
exceed 6 days. 
 
OVERSTAYAL AND EXTENSION OF JOINING TIME 
          9.18. A  Government  employee  who  does  not  join  his  post within  his  joining 
time  is  entitled  to  no  pay  or  leave  salary  after  the  end  of  the  joining  time.  Wilful 
absence from duty after the expiry of joining time may be treated as misbehaviour for 
the purpose of rule 3.17. 
         9.19.  (a)  A    competent  authority  may,  in  any  case  extend  the  joining  time 
admissible under these rules, provided that the general spirit of the rules is observed. 
        (b) Within the prescribed maximum of thirty days, Heads of Departments may, in  
the  case  of Government  employees under their control (other  than  those  belonging  
 

170 
[9.19-9.20] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. IX] 
to All India Services), extend the joining time admissible under the rules to the extent 
necessary in the following circumstances:– 
           (i)  when the Government employee has been unable to use the ordinary mode 
of travelling  or,  notwithstanding  due  diligence  on  his  part  has  spent  more 
time on the journey than is allowed by the rules; or 
          (ii)  when such extension is considered necessary for the public convenience or 
for  the  saving  of  such  public  expenditure  as  is  caused  by  unnecessary  or 
purely formal transfers;        
        (iii)  when  the  rules  have,  in  any  particular  case,  operated  harshly, as for 
example,  when  a  Government  employee  has  through  no  fault  on  his  part 
missed a steamer or fallen sick on the journey. 
  JOINING TIME TO PERSONS NOT IN GOVERNMENT SERVICE ON JOINING 
THE GOVERNMENT SERVICE AND ON REVERSION FROM IT 
          9.20.  A  person  in  employment  other  than  Government  service  or  on  leave 
granted from such employment, if, in the interest of Government, he is appointed to a 
post under Government, may, at the  discretion of the competent authority, be treated 
as on joining time while he prepares for and makes the journey to join the post under 
Government, and while he prepares for and makes the journey on reversion from the 
post under Government to return to his original employment. During such joining time 
he  shall  receive  pay  equal  to  the  pay,  or,  in  the  case  of  joining  time  immediately 
following leave granted from the private employment, to the leave salary, paid to him, 
by his private employer prior to his appointment to Government service or pay equal 
to the pay of the post in Government service, whichever is less. 
 
 
 
 
 

171 
CHAPTER X 
FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA 
         10.1. Meaning of Foreign Service:–As per definition given in rule 2.21 Foreign 
Service  means  service  in  which  a  Government  employee  receives  his  pay  with  the 
sanction of Government from any source other than the revenues of the Union or State 
Government or a Union Territory. 
 
GENERAL CONDITIONS FOR FOREIGN SERVICE 
         10.2. (a) A  competent  authority  may  sanction  the  transfer  of  a Government  
employee to foreign service in or out of India:  
Provided  no Government employee may be  transferred to foreign service  in or 
out of India against his will: 
          Provided further that a Government employee, other than an employee working 
in the Punjab Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, may, in public interest, be transferred without 
his  consent  to  foreign  service  under  a  Company,  a  Corporation  or  a  Body  whether 
incorporated or not, which is wholly or substantially owned or controlled by the State 
Government  or  under  a  Municipal  Corporation  or  a  local  body  within  the  State  of 
Punjab or under the Bhakra Beas Management Board or the Beas Construction Board: 
 Provided  further  that  no  Government employee  shall  be  transferred  to  a  post 
carrying pay which is less than or a pay scale the maximum of which is less than the 
basic pay he would have drawn but for his transfer to foreign service : 
 Provided  further  that  no  Government  employee  shall  be  transferred  to  foreign 
service  unless  the  foreign  employer  undertakes  to  afford  him,  as  far  as,  may  be, 
privileges  not  inferior  to  those  which  he  would  have  enjoyed  under  the  Punjab 
Services (Medical Attendance) Rules, 1940, as amended from time to time, if he had 
been employed in the service of the Government of Punjab. 
(aa)  A  Government  employee,  other  than  an  employee  working  in  the  Punjab 
Vidhan Sabha Secretariat, may in public interest, be deputed without his consent to a 
post under the Administration of Union Territory, Chandigarh: 
           Provided that no Government employee shall be deputed under this clause to  a 
post carrying pay which is less than or a pay scale the maximum of which is less than 
the basic pay he would have drawn but for this deputation. 
          (b) The  Government  which  will  be  entitled  to  recover  pension  contribution  on 
behalf  of  a  Government  employee  lent  to  foreign  service  should  be  regarded  as  the 
Government competent to sanction the transfer. 

172 
 
         10.3. A transfer to foreign service is permissible if the following conditions are 
fulfilled:– 
(a)     the duties to be performed after the transfer are such as should, for public 
reasons, be rendered by a Government employee; 
(b)     the Government employee transferred holds, at the time of his transfer to 
foreign service a post paid from Government revenues, or holds a lien on 
a  permanent  post.  Transfer  of  a  temporary  Government  employee  to 
foreign service who fulfils this condition of lien is also permissible; 
(c)      A  Government  employee  transferred  to  foreign  service  shall  remain  in 
the  cadre  or  cadres  in  which  he  was  included  in  a  substantive  or 
officiating capacity immediately before his transfer. 
                                               PAY AND JOINING TIME 
        10.4.  (a)  A  Government  employee  in  foreign  service  shall  draw  pay  from  the 
foreign employer  from  the  date  on  which  he  relinquishes  charge  of  his  post  in 
Government service. The amount of his pay, the amount of joining time admissible to 
him and his pay during such joining time will be fixed by the authority sanctioning the 
transfer in consultation with the foreign employer. 
(b) The  competent  authority  may  by  general  order  impose  such  restrictions  in 
regard to the  admissibility of pay to an  employee transferred to foreign service, as it 
may  deem  fit. Annexure „A‟ contains  the  restrictions regulating  the  amount  of 
remuneration to be paid to Government employees on foreign service in India. 
        10.5.  A  Government  employee  transferred  to  foreign  service  if  appointed  to 
officiate to a post in Government service, before his term of foreign service expires or 
before  he reverts  to his  parent service in normal course  shall draw pay calculated on 
the pay of the post in which he holds a lien and that of the post in which he officiates. 
In  other  words  his  foreign  service  will  be  taken  into  account in  fixing  his  pay  on 
appointment as above. 
      Note.– Omitted. 
    PENSION AND LEAVE SALARY 
        10.6. (a) A Government employee transferred to foreign service may not, without 
the sanction of the competent authority, accept a pension or gratuity from his foreign 
employer in respect of such service. 
 (b) When any Government employee whose services are lent on foreign service 
conditions  retires from Government service without at the same time retiring from the  
[10.3-10.6] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)   [Chap. X] 

173 
 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA       [10.6-10.7] 
service  of  his  foreign  employer,  the  Accountant-General  shall  communicate  to  the 
foreign  employer  through  the  usual  authorities  a  statement  showing  the  date  of 
retirement  and  the  amount  of  pension  drawn  from  the  Government  so  as  to  give  the 
foreign employer the opportunity, if he be so inclined, of revising the existing terms of 
employment. 
         (c) The  employee on foreign service out of India,  if he  so chooses, may accept 
gratuity  from  the  foreign  Government  but  the  service  rendered  by  him  with  that 
Government shall not qualify for pension under the State Government. The gratuity so 
accepted  shall  be  credited  into  the  General  Provident  Fund  or  the  Contributory 
Provident Fund account, as the case may be, of the employee concerned. 
        10.7.  (a)  While  a  Government  employee  is  in  foreign  service,  contribution 
towards the cost of his pension shall be paid to Government revenues on his behalf. 
         (b) If the foreign service is in India, contributions shall be paid on account of the 
cost of leave salary also. 
         (c) Contribution  due  under  sub-rules  (a)  and  (b)  above  shall  be  paid by  the 
Government  employee  himself,  unless  the  foreign  employer  consents  to  pay  them. 
They shall not be payable during leave taken while in foreign service. 
         Note.–The  payment  of  matching  contribution  in  respect  of  the  Government  employees, 
who  are governed  by  the  New  Defined  Contributory Pension Scheme,  shall  be  made  by  the 
foreign employer in accordance with the procedure specified in this behalf. 
        (d)  (i)  A  Government  employee  in  foreign  service  out  of  India  may  be  granted 
leave  by  his  employer  on  such  conditions  as  the  employer  may  determine.  In  any 
individual case the authority sanctioning the transfer to foreign service may determine 
before  hand in consultation with the foreign employer the  conditions  on which leave 
will be granted by such employer. The leave-salary in respect of leave granted by said 
employer  will  be  paid  by  him  and  the  leave  will  not  be  debited  against  the 
Government employee‟s leave account. 
        Note.–Leave  granted  under  this  sub-rule  should  be  treated  as  leave  and not  as  duty  for 
the purposes of pension.         
        (ii)  In special circumstances, the authority sanctioning transfer to foreign service 
out of India may make an arrangement with the foreign employer under which leave 
may be granted to the Government employee in accordance with the rules applicable 
to him as a Government employee, if the foreign employer pays leave contribution at 
the prescribed rate. 
 
 

174 
RATE OF CONTRIBUTIONS PAYABLE ON ACCOUNT OF 
PENSION AND LEAVE SALARY 
        10.8. (1) The rates of contribution payable on account of pension and leave salary 
shall be such as the competent authority may by general order specify with a view to– 
(a)  secure to the Government employee the pension that he would have earned 
by  service  under  Government  if  he  had  not  been  transferred  to  foreign 
service; and 
           (b)  to secure to Government employee leave salary on the scale and under  the 
conditions applicable to him. 
         (2) A competent authority may remit the contributions due in any specified case 
or  class  of  cases  as  is  done  in  the  case  of  transfer  of  Medical  Officers  to  foreign 
service in Local Fund Charitable Hospitals and Dispensaries. 
         (3)  While  calculating   the   rate  of  leave   salary   admissible   in   the   case   of 
Government employee entitled to a lien in a post and paying his own contributions the 
pay  drawn  in  foreign  service  shall  account  for  the  purpose  of  pay  on  the  last  day  of 
duty. 
          Note.–The  rates  of  contributions  prescribed  under  this  rule  and  the  method  of  their 
calculation are given in Annexure „B‟ appended to this Chapter. 
 TIME LIMIT FOR PAYMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS 
         10.9.  The  payment  of  leave  salary  and  pension contribution  in  respect  of 
Government  employee  in  foreign  service  shall  be  made  (separately  as  they  are 
creditable to different heads of accounts) by the foreign employer or by the employee 
concerned  as  specified  in  the  terms  of  transfer  to  foreign  service within  fifteen  days 
from  the  end  of  the  financial  year  or  at  the  end  of  the  term  of  the  foreign  service, 
whichever is earlier. No dues recoverable from Government on any account, shall be 
set off against these contributions. 
INTEREST ON OVERDUE CONTRIBUTIONS 
        10.10.  In  case  the  contribution  is  not  paid  within  the  specified  period,  interest 
shall be paid to Government on unpaid contribution, according to the terms of foreign 
service at the rate of two paise a day for one hundred rupees from the date of expiry of 
that  period  up  to  the  date  on  which  the  contribution  is  finally  paid.    Where 
contributions  are  paid  not  in  cash  but  by  book  adjustments  in  the  accounts  made  by 
Accountant-General  any  interest  levied  on  overdue  contributions  should  be  charged 
upto the date on which the adjustment is finally made in the accounts. 
[10.8-10.10] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)   [Chap. X] 

175 
 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA  [10.11-10.16] 
REMISSION OF INTEREST 
        10.11. The  Competent  Authority  may  remit  interest  on  overdue  contributions  in 
exceptional circumstances when for instance the payment of the contribution has been 
delayed through no fault of Government employee or the foreign employer concerned.  
Interest  will  not  be  remitted  in  consequence  of  delay  on  the  part  of  the  Accountant-
General  to  make  a  claim,  if  the  facts  on  which  the  claim  is  based  were  within  the 
knowledge of the Government employee or the foreign employer concerned. 
       10.12. If  a  Government  employee  transferred  to  foreign  service  withholds  the 
contributions, he shall forfeit the right to count as duty in Government service the time 
spent  in  foreign  service.  The  contribution  paid  on  his  behalf  maintains  his claim  to 
pension or/and leave salary, as the case may be, in accordance with the rules of 
service  of  which  he  is  a  member.    Neither  the  Government  employee  nor  the 
foreign employer has any right of property in a contribution paid and no claim 
for refund can be entertained. 
    LEAVE WHILE ON FOREIGN SERVICE 
         10.13. A Government employee transferred to foreign service shall before taking 
up his duties in foreign service, acquaint himself with the rules or arrangements which 
will regulate his leave during such service. 
         10.14.  A  Government  employee  transferred  to  foreign  service in  India  may  not 
be granted leave otherwise than in accordance with the rules applicable to the service 
of  which  he  is  a  member,  and  may  not  take  leave  or  receive  leave  salary  from 
Government unless he actually quits duty and goes on leave. 
         10.15.  A  Government  employee  transferred  to  foreign  service  in  India  shall  be 
personally responsible, for the observance of rule 10.14.  By accepting leave to which 
he  is  not  entitled  under  the  rules  he  renders  himself  liable  to  refund  leave  salary 
irregularly drawn  and  in  the  event  of  his  refusing  to  refund,  to  forfeit  his  previous 
service under Government, and to cease to have any claim on Government in respect 
of either pension or leave salary. 
         10.16.  (a)  A  Government  employee  in  foreign  service  out of  India  may  be 
granted leave by his employer on such conditions as the employer may determine.  In 
any  individual  case  the  authority  sanctioning  the  transfer  to  foreign  service  may 
determine  before  hand  in  consultation  with  the  foreign  employer,  the  conditions  on 
which  leave  will  be  granted  by  such  employer.  The  leave  salary  in  respect  of  leave 
granted by the said employer shall be paid by him and the leave shall not be  debited 
against the Government employee‟s leave account. Leave granted under this clause 
should be treated as leave and not as duty for the purposes of pension. 

176 
 
[10.16-10.19] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. X] 
          (b) In special circumstances, the authority sanctioning transfer to foreign service 
out of India may  make  an  arrangement with the  foreign employer under which leave 
may be granted to the Government employee in accordance with the rules applicable 
to him as a Government employee, if the foreign employer pays leave contribution at 
the rate prescribed under rule 10.8 or otherwise specified. 
          10.17. The  grant of leave  preparatory to retirement to a  Government employee 
coupled with permission to remain in the service  of  the  foreign  employer  shall  be 
regulated in the following manner:– 
  (1)  In the case of a Government employee, who is already on foreign service in 
or out of India under a body corporate, owned or controlled by Government 
applies  for  leave  preparatory  to retirement. The leave  applied for can be                     
granted  only if the  body corporate,  owned  or controlled  by Government is 
prepared  to  release  him  from  its  employment  to  enable  him  to  enjoy  the 
leave. 
 (2)   In  the  case  of  a  Government  employee  who  is  transferred  to  foreign 
service in or out of India under a body other than a body corporate, owned 
or   controlled   by   Government   who   applies   for   leave   preparatory   to 
retirement,  such  a  leave  shall  be  admissible  only  where  the  Government 
employee  quits  duty  under  the  foreign  employer.    In  other  words  he  will 
not  be  permitted to  continue  in  employment  under  the  foreign  employer 
while on leave preparatory to retirement. If he is allowed to continue in the 
employment  of  the  foreign organisation  after  the  date  of  superannuation, 
he shall be treated purely as on private employment. 
                      REVERSION FROM FOREIGN SERVICE 
         10.18. A  Government  employee  reverts  from  foreign  service to  Government 
service  on  the  date  on  which  he  takes  charge  of  his  post  in  Government  service; 
provided  that  if  he  takes  leave  on  the  conclusion  of  foreign  service  before  rejoining 
his post, his reversion shall take effect from such date as the competent authority may 
declare. 
         10.19. When   a   Government   employee   reverts   from   foreign service to 
Government service,  his  pay  shall  cease  to  be  paid by  the  foreign  employer,  and  his 
contributions shall be discontinued, with effect from the date of reversion. 
       Note.–(1)  If  the  Government  employee  is  repatriated  by  the  borrowing  Government 
before  the  expiry  of  the  agreed  term  of  deputation,  the  salary  of  such  an  employee  for  the 
period  from  the  date  of  relieving  from  foreign  service  to  the  date  he  takes charge  of  the  post 
under the State Government, shall be paid by the foreign employer: 
  
 

177 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA [10.19-10.20] 
        Provided that if such Government employee is relieved by the foreign employer on the 
basis  of a  complaint  or  indiscipline  or  misconduct  in  the  discharge  of  his  duties,  such  period 
shall be treated as leave of the kind due. 
       (2)  A  specific  provision  to  this  effect  shall  invariably  be  incorporated  in  the terms  and 
conditions of the deputation or foreign service. 
                              RECOVERIES IN THE CASES OF ADDITIONS TO 
                              REGULAR ESTABLISHMENT 
         10.20.  (1) The  following  rules  shall  govern  the  recoveries  in  the  cases  of 
additions  made  to  a  regular  establishment  from  the persons for  whose benefit the 
additional establishment  is  created  on  the  condition  that  its  cost  or  a  definite  
portion of its cost shall be recovered from the persons concerned:– 
(a)   The  amount  to  be  recovered shall  be  the  gross  sanctioned  cost  of  the 
service  or  of  the  portion  of  the  service  as  the  case  may  be,  and  shall  not 
vary with the actual expenditure of any month. 
(b)   The cost of the service shall include contributions at such rates  as  may be 
laid down under rule 10.8 and the contributions shall be calculated on the 
sanctioned rates of pay of the members of the establishment. 
(c)   A competent  authority  may  reduce  the  amount  of  recoveries,  or  may 
entirely forego them. 
         (2)   The   following   procedure shall   be   adopted   in   applying   the   rates   of 
contribution prescribed under rule 10.8 to cases falling under this rule:– 
            (i)  Pension contribution.–In the case of a Government employee of one of the 
State Services, Group „A‟, or holding a special post of corresponding rank, 
the amount to be recovered as contribution shall be the average of the rates 
prescribed in column 2 of the table in Annexure B to this Chapter. 
          In  the  case  of  employees  of  other  services  or  those  holding  special  posts of 
corresponding  ranks  a  fraction  of  the  total  maximum  monthly  pay  of  all  the  
sanctioned posts equal to the average of the percentages laid down in columns 3 and 
4 of the table referred to above shall be levied. 
  (ii) Contribution  for  leave  salary.–The rate  for  calculating  the  amount  to  be 
levied as contribution in respect of a member of one of the State Services, 
Group „A‟,  or  holding  a  special  post  of  corresponding  rank  shall  be  the 
average  of  the  rates  prescribed  for  Government  employees  subject  to 
ordinary  leave  rules  in  Chapter  VIII,   whereas  the  actual  percentage 
prescribed  for  other  Government  employees  shall  be  levied  on  the  total 
sanctioned cost, or in the case of time-scales of pay on the average cost of 
all the posts concerned. 

178 
 
 [10.20-10.21] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap.X] 
(3)  The procedure laid down in sub-rule (2) above shall also be applicable to all 
Government  commercial  concerns  in  which  leave  and  pensionary  charges  are 
adjusted  on  contribution  basis  in  their regular  commercial  accounts  or  in  which 
pensionary  charges  are  taken  into  account  calculating  the  issue  price  of  goods 
manufactured or fees  for  service  rendered  or  to  any  other  department  in  which 
pensionary  charges  are  adjusted  in  the  regular accounts  on  the  basis  of  foreign 
service contribution rates. 
       GENERAL CONDITIONS OF DEPUTATION AND 
  DEPUTATION ALLOWANCE 
                                 GENERAL CONDITIONS 
          10.21.  (1) (i) The term „deputation‟ covers only appointment made by transfer 
on   temporary   basis.   Appointments   of   Government   employees   made   either   by 
promotion  or  by  direct  recruitment  in  competition  with  candidates  from  the  open 
market,  whether  on  a  permanent  or  temporary basis  shall  not  be  regarded  as 
deputation.  Similarly, permanent appointments  made by transfer shall not be treated 
as deputation. 
          (ii) The  transfer  on  an  employee  from  one  department  to  another  department 
under the Punjab Government will not be considered as deputation and no deputation 
allowance will be admissible. 
  (iii)  The term „Basic Pay‟ for this purpose shall mean the pay drawn in the 
scale  of  pay  of  the  substantive  appointment  held  or  the  pay  in  the  scale  of  pay  of 
officiating  appointment  in  an  employee‟s  present  cadre  provided  the  officiating 
appointment  so  held  was  not  in  a  tenure  post  and  it  is  certified  by  the  appointing 
authority that but for the deputation the employee concerned would have continued to 
hold the officiating appointment indefinitely. 
  (iv)  Personal  pay,  if  any,  drawn  by  an  employee  on  the  post  in  his  parent 
department  may  be  allowed  in  addition  and  will  not  be  absorbed  in  the  deputation 
allowance, but will be absorbed in other increases in pay e.g. increment or increase of 
pay by promotion or for any other reason. 
         DEPUTATION ALLOWANCE 
         10.21.  (2)  The  grant  of  deputation  allowance  to  Public  Government  employees 
who are transferred on deputation or to foreign service to other State Governments or 
the  Central  Government  or  bodies  (incorporated  or  not),  wholly  or  substantially 
owned or controlled by Government,  provided the transfer  is  outside the regular line 
and is in the public interest shall be regulated as under :– 

179 
           (1)  (i) The deputation allowance shall be granted only in those cases where the 
services  of  specialists  in  scientific  and  technical  fields  are  required  by the local 
authorities and other public or quasi-public bodies in the public interest and the choice 
of the officer is made by the Government and not by the borrowing organisation; and  
           (ii) The deputation allowance shall be admissible at the rate of five per cent of 
basic pay  of  the  Government  employee  subject  to  a  maximum  of  one  thousand  and 
five  hundred  rupees  per  mensem  at  the  same  station  and  ten  per  cent  of basic pay 
subject to a maximum of three thousand rupees per mensem at a different station. 
          (2)  The   deputationist shall   either   be   allowed   special   pay   or   deputation 
allowance on his basic pay and not both, irrespective of the fact whether the special 
pay has been sanctioned for the parent post in lieu of higher time scale or otherwise. 
Similarly  special  pay,  if  any,  attached  to  a  deputation  post  shall  also not be 
admissible along with deputation allowance. 
(3)   Any  project  allowance  admissible  in  a  project  area  may  be  drawn  in 
addition to the deputation allowance.   
(4)  Where  a  special  rate  of  deputation  allowance  is admissible  in  any  area  on 
account of conditions of living there being particularly arduous or unattractive, such 
a  special  rate  being  more  favourable  than  that  admissible  under  these  rules,  the 
Government employees deputed to such area will be given the benefit of the special 
rate. 
(5)  The  deputation  of  an  employee  to  the  Union  Territory  of  Chandigarh  or 
transfer of an employee to foreign service under the Bhakra Beas Management Board 
or the Beas Construction Board, shall be treated as service in the interest of the State 
of Punjab and no deputation allowance shall be admissible. 
 
                  PAY ON DEPUTATION TO UNIVERSITIES, CORPORATIONS, 
                  LOCAL BODIES AND OTHER CORPORATE BODIES 
 
          10.22. (1) The Government employees who go on deputation on foreign service 
to the Universities, Corporations, Local Bodies and other corporate bodies shall not be 
allowed to get higher start.  In case a Government employee wants to take advantage 
of a higher scale of pay advertised by the  Universities,  Corporations,  Local  Bodies 
and other corporate bodies he can do so after resigning from Government service.   
         Note.–The   Administrative   Department   should   ensure   that   a   representative   of   the 
Department of Finance is invariably associated in making recruitment to the corporate bodies, 
which are receiving financial assistance from the Government of Punjab. 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA     [10.21-10.22] 

180 
          (2)  A  Government  employee  placed  on deputation  may  opt  to  draw  either  the 
pay in the scale of pay of the new post, as may be fixed under the normal rules, or his 
basic pay in the parent Government Department plus personal pay, if any, under rule 
10.21 plus deputation allowance.  For determining the pay under the normal rules for 
this  purpose in case  of deputation to autonomous  bodies, it may be  assumed  that the 
Government rules apply. The option once exercised shall be final except that on each 
occasion   when such   an   employee   receives   proforma   promotion   in   his   parent 
Government  department  under the  next  below rule  or  is  reverted  to  a  lower  grade  in 
the  parent  Government  or  is  appointed  to  another  grade  by  the  borrowing  agency  a 
fresh option shall be allowed to him.  
(3) The employee on deputation may be given the benefit of the “next below” 
rule.    
(4) No Government employee shall receive an abnormal increase in pay because 
of  his  deputation.  In  cases  in  which  a  Government  employee  is  sent  on  deputation 
against a  post  the  minimum  scale  of  pay  of  which  plus  deputation  allowance 
substantially  exceeds  the  emoluments  normally  admissible  to  the  deputationist,  viz., 
the  pay  which  he  draws  in  the  post  from  which  he  proceeds  on  deputation  plus 
deputation allowance, the authority ordering the  deputation shall restrict the  pay in a 
suitable manner to curtail the substantial excess thereof.  
(5) (i)  These  rules  also  apply  in  other  cases  of  deputation  or  appointments  of 
employees of other State Governments and the Central Government to posts under the 
Punjab   Government. Where,   however,   special   orders may   exist   in   respect   of 
appointments  of a  specific category  of  employees  to a  specified  class  of  posts,  those 
orders will continue to be applied instead of these orders.    
(ii)  If  a  Central  Government  or  any  other  State  Government  employee  on 
deputation   to   the   Punjab   Government   or   a   Punjab   Government   employee   on 
deputation to Central Government or any other State Government is allowed to retain 
the  scale  of pay,  admissible  to  him  in  his  parent  Government  plus  deputation 
allowance,  if  any,  dearness  allowance  should  also  be  allowed  under  the  rules  of  the 
parent Government or organisation. Local allowances such as compensatory (city) and 
house  rent  allowances will, however,  be  payable  under  the  rules  of  the  borrowing 
Government. If, however, the deputationist is appointed in the scale of pay prescribed 
for  the  post  by  the  borrowing  Government,  he  should  be  allowed  to  draw  all 
allowances   including   dearness allowance under   the   rules   of   the   borrowing 
Government.  This sub-rule shall not be applicable to cases where separate orders are 
issued  in   consultation   with   Department   of   Finance   or   where   special   terms   of 
deputation are fixed in consultation with the Department of Finance.  
[10.22] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)   [Chap. X] 

181 
  [Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA  [10.22-10.24] 
         (6)  In  a  case,  a  person  already  on  deputation  is  desired  to  be  promoted  to  a 
higher  post  in  the  borrowing  department,  the  borrowing  Government/authority  shall 
obtain  the  concurrence  of  the  lending  Government/authority  prior  to  that  promotion. 
The lending Government/authority shall in such a situation also decide how the pay in 
the higher post shall be regulated.  
         (7)  This rule shall not apply to cases of deputation to posts outside India. 
HOW TO TREAT DEPUTATION ALLOWANCE 
        10.23. The   deputation   allowance admissible   to   Government   employees 
transferred  on  deputation  or  to  foreign  service  to  any  other  State  Government  or  the 
Central Government or Bodies (incorporated or not) wholly or substantially owned or 
controlled  by  the  State  Government shall  not  count  as  emoluments  for  any  purpose 
other  than  pension.    In  case  of  pension too  it  shall  count  as  emoluments  only  if it  is 
mutually  agreed  upon  between  the  two  Governments  that  it  shall  so  count  for  the 
purposes of pension and the sharing of additional liability is also settled before hand. 
           Note  1.–It  has  been  mutually  agreed  upon  by  the  Punjab  Government  and  the  Central 
Government  that  with  effect  from  4
th
 September,  1973  special  pay  and  deputation  (duty) 
allowance  and  with  effect  from  11
th
 February,  1974  officiating  pay  drawn  on  the  deputation 
post,  irrespective  of  whether  they  would  have  drawn  it  had  they  not  been  sent  on  deputation 
shall  be  counted  towards  pension  in  the  case  of  officials  on  deputation  from  the  Punjab 
Government  to  the  Central  Government  and  vice  versa.  The  additional  liability  would  be 
shared by the Punjab Government and Government of India in accordance with the provisions 
of Appendix 3 to the Account Code, Volume I. 
          Note  2.–The  rules  regarding  leave  salary  and  pension  contribution  as  laid  down  in 
Appendix  3  to  the  Account  Code,  Volume  I  shall  apply  in  cases  where  a  permanent 
Government  employee  is  appointed  under  a  different  Government through  open  competition, 
provided  he  is  not  required  to  resign  his  previous  appointment  and  the  Government  under 
whom he  was employed prior to his appointment under a different Government through open 
competition agrees to retain his lien until he is finally absorbed by the latter Government.      
     RESTRICTION ON GRANT OF EXTRAORDINARY CONCESSIONS 
         10.24. The  grant  of  extraordinary  attractive  concessions  in  the  shape  of  higher 
pay    scales,    additional    remuneration,    conveyance    allowance,    free    residential 
accommodation, free use of electricity and  water, free use of car, use of servants for 
private purposes, sumptuary allowance and bonus or award for good work shall not be 
allowed  to  Government  employees  deputed  on  foreign  service  to  private  bodies 
without the prior approval of the Department of Finance. 

182 
 
[10.25-10.28] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. X] 
PERIOD OF DEPUTATION 
         10.25. The initial period of deputation may be extended up to three years by the 
Administrative  Department  concerned  and  if  in  a  rare  case  of  special  nature,  the 
exigencies  so  require  in  public  interest,  such  period  may  be  extended  beyond three 
years  by the  Administrative  Department concerned  with the  prior concurrence of the 
Department of Personnel: 
         Provided  that  where  the  Administrative  Department  in  consultation  with  the 
Department  of  Personnel agrees  to  extend  the  period  of  deputation  of  an  employee 
beyond a period of three years, the deputation allowance and other benefits available 
in  the  borrowing  department  or  organisation  in  addition  to  those  available  in  the 
parent department shall not be admissible during the period of deputation so extended: 
         Provided further that in case  of deputation to Government of India,  other State 
Governments or Public Sector Undertakings and other bodies wholly and substantially 
owned  by  the  other  Governments,  the  deputation  allowance  may  be  drawn  by  an 
employee irrespective of the period of deputation, if the foreign employer is willing to 
continue the payment thereof, and the exigencies of public interest do not demand the 
recall of the employee in connection with the affairs of the State. 
    TRAVELLING ALLOWANCE AND DAILY ALLOWANCE 
                                DURING DEPUTATION 
          10.26. A deputationist, or a Government employee on transfer to foreign service 
shall  be  entitled  to  the  Travelling  and  Daily  Allowance  at the  rates  applicable  in  the 
borrowing organisation.  
    HOUSE RENT ALLOWANCE DURING DEPUTATION 
          10.27. House Rent Allowance will be admissible to a deputationist at the same 
rates as is admissible to the other Government employees of equivalent categories. A 
deputationist  who  may  be  occupying  a  Government  residential  accommodation  will 
be permitted to retain the same on payment of five percent of his pay plus deputation 
allowance or the standard rent, whichever is less, as house rent from his own pocket, 
the difference between the market rent and the rent paid by the deputationist from his 
own pocket shall be paid by the borrowing organisation. 
CONDITIONS TO BE OBSERVED WHILE SANCTIONING THE CASES 
OF DEPUTATION OR FOREIGN SERVICE 
          10.28. (1) A Government employee who has served on deputation or on foreign 
service  should  not  be  allowed  to  proceed  on  deputation  or  on  foreign  service  again 
unless  he  has  worked  for  a  minimum  period  of  two  years  on a post in his parent  

183 
Government on reversion from deputation or foreign service from the first assignment 
so that Government may be able to make the best use of his service. 
          (2) The   Government   has   an   inherent   power   to   terminate   deputation 
arrangements earlier than the period specified in the order of terms and conditions of 
deputation  when  exigencies  so  demand.    Government  may,  of  its  own  motion  or  on 
the request of the borrowing organisation or authority, recall a Government employee 
at any time before the expiry of the period of deputation.  However, to make it more 
clear  and  to  remove  any  doubt  in  this  behalf,  a  specific  condition  empowering  the 
State Government to recall a Government employee before the expiry of the period of  
deputation  shall  invariably  be  incorporated  in all  orders  transferring  employees  on 
deputation or to foreign service. 
        (3)  In  the  case  of  Companies,  Corporations,  Boards  etc.,  which  are  under  the 
direct  or  indirect  control  of  the  Punjab  Government,  the  maximum  three  years  (five 
years in rare cases of special nature) period of deputation shall be strictly adhered to. 
Such  corporate  bodies  shall  be  required  to  take  replacements  from  the  Government 
Departments concerned.          
       10.29.  Any  relaxation  of  the  conditions  and  principles  of  deputation  or  foreign 
service laid down in this chapter will require prior concurrence of the Department of 
Finance.  
     ANNEXURE „A‟ 
     [Referred to in rule 10.4 (a)] 
      The    amount  of    remuneration  to  be    granted    to    a    Government    employee 
transferred  to foreign service  in  India  be  regulated by the following  principles:– 
   (1)  When the transfer of a Government employee to foreign service in India is 
sanctioned, the pay which he shall receive in such service must be precisely specified 
in  the  order  sanctioning  the  transfer.  If  it  is  intended  that  he  shall  receive  any 
remuneration  or  enjoy  any  concession  of  pecuniary  value,  in  addition  to  his  pay 
proper,  the  exact  notice  of  such  remuneration  or  concession  must  be  similarly 
specified. No Government employee will be permitted to receive any remuneration or 
enjoy  any  concession  which  is  not  so  specified,  and,  if  the  order  is  silent  as  to  any 
particular remuneration or concession, it must be assumed that the intention is that it 
shall not be enjoyed. 
(2)  The  following  two  general  principles  must  be  observed  in  sanctioning  the 
conditions of transfer:–     
      (a)  The terms granted to the Government employee must not be such as to 
impose an unnecessarily heavy burden on the foreign employer. 
      (b)  The terms granted must not be so greatly in excess of the remuneration 
which the Government employee  would receive in Government service 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA  [10.28-10.29] 

184 
             as   to   render   foreign   service   appreciably   more   attractive   than 
Government service. 
          Note.–The intention of this principle is to prevent undue increase in the emoluments of 
the individual Government employee transferred to foreign service. His pay in foreign service 
should,  therefore,  be  fixed  with  reference  to  the  post  which  he  would  have  held  under 
Government,  had  he  not  been  transferred  and  not  with  reference  to  the  post  in  India 
corresponding to that held by him in foreign service.            
(3)  If  the  two  principles  laid  down  in  paragraph  (2)  above  are  observed,  a 
competent  authority  may  sanction  the  grant  of  the  following  concessions  by  the 
foreign employer. Such concessions must not be sanctioned as a matter of course but 
in  those  cases  only  in  which  their  grant  is  in  accordance  with  local  custom  and  the 
wishes  of  the  foreign  employer,  and  is,  in  the  opinion  of  the  competent  authority, 
justified  by  the  circumstances.    The  value  of  the  concessions  must  be  taken  into 
account  in  determining  appropriate  rate  of  pay  for  the  Government  employee  in 
foreign service:– 
(a)  The  payment  of  contribution  towards  leave  salary  and  pension under  the 
ordinary rules regulating such contributions. 
(b)  The grant of conveyance allowance under the ordinary travelling allowance 
rules of  the  Punjab  Government  or  under  the  local  rules  of  the  foreign 
employer. 
(c)  The  use  of  tents,  boats,  and  transport  on  tour;  provided  that  this  is 
accompanied  by  a  corresponding  reduction  in  the  amount  of  travelling 
allowance admissible. 
(d)  The  grant  of  free  residential  accommodation  which  may  be  furnished,  in 
cases  in  which  the  competent  authority  considers  this  to  be  desirable,  on 
such scale as may seem proper to that authority 
 (e) The use of motors, carriages and animals. 
 (f) Payment by the foreign employer of such compensatory allowance as would 
be  paid  by  Government  at  the  station  at  which  he  is  employed  in  foreign 
service, to the Government employee in the service of that Government. 
  (4)  The  grant  of  any  concession  not  specified  in  paragraph  (3)  above  requires 
the sanction of the Department of Finance. 
         (5)  Specific   terms   in   regard   to   travelling   allowance   to   be   allowed   to 
Government  employees  for  journeys  on  transfer  to  foreign  service, and  on reversion 
therefrom, should  invariably  be  prescribed  by  sanctioning  authorities  in  consultation 
and  agreement  with  the  foreign  employer,  i.e., it  should  be  made  clear  in  the  orders 
sanctioning  the transfer  whether  the travelling allowance for such journeys, which is  
[Annexure A] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)   [Chap. X] 

185 
payable  by  the  foreign  employer  is  to  be  regulated  by  the  Punjab  Civil  Services 
(Travelling  Allowance)  Rules,  Volume  III  or  by  the  rules  framed  by  the  foreign 
employer. 
 (6) The  foreign employers  should  in  the  case  of  Government  employees 
transferred to foreign  service  accept  liability  for  leave  salary  in  respect  of  disability 
leave granted  on  account  of  disability  incurred  in  and  through  foreign  service,  even 
though  such  disability  manifests,  itself  after  the  termination  of  foreign  service.  The 
leave   salary   charges   for   such   leave   should   be   recovered   direct   from   foreign 
employers.  The  foreign  employer  is  liable  to  pay  leave  salary  charges,  if  it  is 
medically certified that the disability has been incurred in or through foreign service, 
irrespective of the period that has elapsed between the date of reversion and the date 
of manifestation of the disability. 
ANNEXURE „B‟ 
(Referred to in note below Rule 10.8) 
         The following rates of contributions on account of Pension and Leave Salary 
have been prescribed by Government under rule 10.8:– 
          1.  Rates of monthly contributions for pension payable during active foreign 
service:– 
Length of 
Service 
  
Percentage  of  the  maximum  monthly pay  of  the  post  in  the 
officiating  or  substantive  grade,  as  the  case  may  be,  held  by  the 
officer at the time of proceeding on foreign service or to which he 
may receive proforma promotion while on foreign service in case 
of – 
Group „A‟ 
Government 
employee  
Group „B‟ 
Government 
employee  
Group „C‟ 
Government 
employee  
Group „D‟ 
Government 
employee  
1 2 3 4 5 
0-1 Years 7 5 5 4 
1-2 Years 7 6 6 4 
2-3 Years 8 7 6 5 
3-4 Years 8 7 7 5 
4-5 Years 9 8 7 5 
5-6 Years 10 8 7 6 
6-7 Years 10 9 8 6 
7-8 Years 11 9 8 6 
8-9 Years 11 10 9 7 
9-10 Years 12 10 9 7 
10-11 Years 12 11 10 7 
11-12 Years 13 11 10 8 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA [Annexures A & B] 

186 
1 2 3 4 5 
12-13 Years 14 12 10 8 
13-14Years 14 12 11 8 
14-15Years 15 13 11 9 
15-16 Years 15 13 12 9 
16-17 Years 16 14 12 9 
17-18 Years 16 14 13 10 
18-19 Years 17 15 13 10 
19-20 Years 17 15 13 10 
20-21 Years 18 16 14 11 
21-22 Years 19 16 14 11 
22-23 Years 19 17 15 11 
23-24 Years 20 17 15 12 
24-25 Years 20 17 16 12 
25-26 Years 21 18 16 12 
26-27 Years 21 18 16 13 
27-28 Years 22 19 17 13 
28-29 Years 23 19 17 13 
29-30 Years 23 20 18 13 
Over 31 Years 23 20 18 14 
        2.  Rates of monthly contribution for leave salary payable during active foreign 
service  in  respect  of  Government  employees  subject  to  leave  rules  in  Section  III  of 
Chapter VIII shall be at 11 per cent of pay drawn in foreign service. 
         Note  1.–In the case of contract officers governed by the leave terms in Parts I and II of 
Appendix 16 to the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I, Part II, and who are transferred to 
foreign  service  the  leave  salary  contribution  should  be  recovered  at  the  rates  prescribed  for 
Government employees subject to the Leave Rules in Section III of Chapter VIII, respectively.            
          Note  2.–Recovery  of  leave  contribution  in  respect  of  joining  time  taken  under  rule        
9.1(b)  while  proceeding  to  foreign  service  should  be  based  on  the  pay  that  the  Government 
employees would draw on the assumption of office in foreign service. 
          3.  The  following  instructions  should  be  observed  in  the  calculation  of  the 
amounts of contribution:– 
  (i) The term “active foreign service” in paragraphs 1 and 2 above is intended 
to  include  the period  of  joining  time  which  may  be  allowed  to  a 
Government  employee  both  on  the  occasion  of  his  proceeding  to  and 
reverting  from  foreign  service and  accordingly  contributions  are  leviable 
in respect of such periods. 
[Annexure B] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I)   [Chap. X] 
                        

187 
  (ii)   “Length of service” means the total period running from the date  from 
which service for pension commences or is likely to commence. 
(iii)   The  leave  salary  contribution  for  the  period  of  joining  time  taken  by  a    
Government  employee  in  continuation  of  leave  under  clause  (b)  of  Rule 
9.1 before reversion from foreign service should be calculated on the pay 
he was getting immediately before he proceeded on leave. 
(iv)  When a temporary Government employee is transferred to foreign service, 
pension  contributions  should  be  recovered  as  in  the  case  of  permanent 
Government employees. 
 In  such  cases  the  recovery  of  contributions  for  leave  salary  does not  present 
any  difficulty,  the  amounts  being  calculated  on  the  pay  actually  drawn  in  foreign 
service. 
(v)   In the case of Government employees mentioned in rule 4.2 of Volume II 
of these rules, the period which they are entitled to add under that rule to 
their  service  qualifying  for  superannuation  pension  should  be  taken  into 
account  in  reckoning  “length  of  service”  for  determining  the  rates  of 
foreign service contribution on account of pension prescribed. 
 (vi)   Omitted. 
          Note.–The expression „length of service‟ occurring in this paragraph should be taken to 
mean   the   entire   continuous   service   of   the   Government   employee   concerned   including 
temporary service in a pensionable post. 
                                              
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Chap. X] FOREIGN SERVICE AND DEPUTATION IN INDIA   [Annexure B] 

188 
                                                          CHAPTER XI   
SERVICE UNDER LOCAL FUNDS  
          11.1.  Government  employees  paid  from  local  funds  which  are  administered  by 
Government are  subject to the  provisions  of Chapter I to  IX and  XII to XIV of these 
rules. 
           Note  1.–Employees of local funds administered by  Government  who are  not paid from 
consolidated fund by the State and are, therefore, not Government employees are subject to the 
provisions of Chapter I to IX of the rules. 
         Note  2.–The expression “Local Funds which are administered by Government”, means 
funds  administered  by  bodies  which  by  law  or  rule  having  the  force  of  law  come  under  the 
control of Government in regard to proceedings generally, and not merely in regard to specific 
matters,  such  as  the  sanctioning  of  the  budget  or  sanction  to  the  creation  or  filling  up  of 
particular  posts  or  the  enactment  of  leave,  pensions  or  similar  rules;  in  other  words  it  means 
funds over whose expenditure Government retains complete and direct control. 
          11.2. The transfer of Government employees to service under local funds which 
are not administered by Government will be regulated by the rules in Chapter X. 
                       11.3. Persons  transferred to Government service  from a  local fund which is  not 
administered by Government will be treated as joining a first post under Government, 
and  their  previous  service  will  not  count  as  duty  performed.    A  competent  authority 
may,  however,  allow  previous  service  in  such  cases  to  count  as  duty  performed  on 
such terms as it thinks fit. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

189 
 
                                                          CHAPTER XII 
 
   RECORD OF SERVICE 
 
         12.1.  Service  record  of  each  Government  employee  shall  be  maintained  by  the 
Head  of  Department or  Office  in  such  form  and  manner as  may  be  prescribed  by the 
Department  of  Finance  of  its  own  or  in  consultation  with  the  Accountant-General, 
Punjab, or as may be prescribed by the Comptroller and Auditor General of India: 
          Provided  that  the  maintenance  of  service  record  may  be  dispensed  with  in  the 
case of Government employees whose service particulars are recorded in the history of 
service or a service register by the Head of the Department: 
          Provided  further  that  in  the  case  of  Police  Officers  of and  below  the  rank  of  a 
Head   Constable,   the   Government/Head   of   the   Department   may   require   the 
maintenance of such additional particulars and bio-data as may be deemed fit. 
         Note.–The  form presently prescribed for the  maintenance of service  record is A.T.C. 3. 
(See Part II Appendix 11). 
         12.2. (1)  All  the  incidents  relating  to  the  official  career  of  a  Government 
employee,  which  have  a  bearing  on  pay,  promotion,  leave,  pension  etc.  shall  be 
recorded in the service record of such a Government employee particularly in respect 
of the following incidents along with the dates and the relevant authentication/orders:–   
(i) Appointment and joining. 
             (i-a)      Completion of probation period/extension of probation period/ 
confirmation. 
(ii) Grant of increment or withholding of increment. 
(iii) Grant of Selection Grade. 
(iv)     Grant of benefit of Assured Career Progression Scheme.  
(v)       Fixation of pay. 
             (vi)      Grant of leave. 
             (vii)     Deputation/transfer. 
            (viii)     Suspension  or  interruption  in  service  along  with  details  of  the  period   
thereof. 
   (ix)      Reinstatement. 
(x)       Resignation. 
 (xi)      Termination of service along with its reasons. 
 (xii)     Promotion. 

190 
[12.2-12.4] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XII] 
 (xiii)     Compulsory/Premature/Voluntary Retirement. 
 (xiv)     Removal or dismissal from service. 
  (xv)     Reversion. 
 (xvi)    Reduction  in  rank  or  pay  along  with  the  precise  reasons  thereof  viz.  
whether reduction   is   on   account   of   inefficiency   or   reduction in  
establishment or abolition of the post held by the employee. 
(xvii)    Retirement on superannuation. 
(xviii)   Extension in service after the date of retirement on superannuation. 
 
 (2)  Each entry in the  service record shall be  neatly made and  duly attested by 
the  Head  of Department or Office, as the case  may be.  However, where  an employee 
himself  is  the  Head  of  the  Department  or  Office,  the  attestation  of  the  entries  in  his 
service record shall be made by the next higher authority. 
 The  attesting  officer  shall  ensure  that  the  entries  are  made  regularly  and  in 
proper manner. 
 (3)   Erasure,   overwriting   or   interpolation   in   the   service   record   are   not 
permissible and all corrections where necessary shall be made under proper attestation 
by the attesting officer. 
 (4)  The Head of Department or Office, as the case may be,  may authorise  any 
responsible  official,  preferably  who  supervises  the  office,  under  him  not  below  the 
rank  of  the  Government  employee  to whom  the  service  record  pertains  to  attest  the 
entries  made  in  that  record  from  time  to  time.  Such  authorisation  will,  however,  not 
absolve him of any responsibility for ensuring accuracy of the entry so attested. 
          12.3. It shall be the duty of every Head of Department or Office, as the case may 
be,  to  initiate  action  to  show  the  service  book,  every  financial  year  within  its  first 
quarter, to the Government employee, concerned under his administrative control and 
obtain  his  signatures  thereon  in  respect  of  each  entry  in  token  of  his  having  seen  the 
service  book.  A  certificate  to  the  effect  that  necessary  action  in  this  behalf  has  been 
taken  in  respect  of  the  preceding  financial  year  shall  be  submitted  by  the  concerned 
Head of Department or Office as the case may be, to the next higher authority by the 
end  of  every  September.  Before  affixing  his  signatures  the  Government  employee  
concerned shall ensure that his service has been duly verified and certified as required 
by the rules. 
          12.4. (1) The service record including the service book required to be maintained 
under  the  preceding  rules  shall  be  kept in the custody of the Head of Department or  
  

191 
 
[Chap. XII]           RECORD OF SERVICE       [12.4-12.5] 
Office,  as  the  case  may  be,  in  which  the  Government  employee  concerned  is  serving 
and it shall be transferred to the office to which such a Government  employee  may be  
transferred.  The  service  record  so maintained  shall  in  no  case  be  made  over  to  the 
Government employee concerned. 
(2)  If  the  Government  employee  is  transferred  to  foreign  service,  his  Head  of 
Department or Office, as the case may be, shall note therein the order sanctioning the 
transfer, effect of the transfer in regard to leave  admissible during the foreign service 
and  such  other  particulars  as  he  may  consider  necessary  in  connection  with  the 
transfer.   On   retransfer   of   the   Government   employee   from   foreign   service   to 
Government  service,  the  head  of his Department  or  Office,  as  the  case  may  be,  shall 
note  in  it  all  necessary  particulars  connected  with  his  foreign  service,  including  the 
facts of recovery of leave and pension contributions. 
         12.5.  A Government  employee  shall  be  entitled  to  have  a  certified  copy  of  his 
service  book  on  payment  of  such  amount  as  may  be  fixed  by  the  Department  of 
Finance by a general or special order as copying fee and cost of the service book and 
also to have all subsequent events and entries recorded therein under proper attestation 
by the Attesting Officer. 
           
          Note. Omitted. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

192 
                                         CHAPTER XIII 
 
                                            PASSAGES 
                                               Omitted. 
 
 

193 
CHAPTER XIV 
 
               CLASSIFICATION   OF   SERVICES (INCLUDING METHOD   OF   
RECRUITMENT  AND  APPOINTMENT  THERETO AND NUMBER 
              AND CHARACER  OF  POSTS), CONDUCT  AND  DISCIPLINE AND 
PUNISHMENT AND APPEALS. 
 
                SECTION I.  CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICES 
                                        (a)  GENERAL 
          14.1.  The Public Services  of  the  State  under  the  administrative  control  of the 
Government of Punjab shall be classified as under:– 
     (i)    The Punjab State Services Group ‘A’; 
     (ii)   The Punjab State Services Group ‘B’; 
                  (iii)   The Punjab State Services Group ‘C’; and  
      (iv)   The Punjab State Services Group ‘D’.  
        14.2. In the case of a person to whom these rules apply and who is not already 
included in any of the services given in rule 14.1 the competent authority shall decide 
the service to which he shall belong. 
          14.3.  (1)  Any  person  who  is  dismissed  from  Government service  shall  not  be 
appointed to any of the State services or posts.  
           (2)  A member of any of the State service when appointed to any other service 
or post shall not be deprived, without his consent, of any right or privilege to which he 
may  have  been  entitled  as  a  member  of  his  former service.  This protection  will 
however,  not  be  available  to  a  member  of  the  service, whose  appointment  in  his 
former service has  been terminated  by awarding the penalty of removal from service 
under rule 5 of the Punjab Civil Services (Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1970.    
          14.4.  A  competent  authority  may  make  rules  regulating  (1)  the  method  of 
recruitment to the  different services,  (2) the strength (including both the  number and 
character  of  posts)  of  such  services,  and  (3)  the  making  of  first  appointment  to  the 
different services. 
         Note  1.–Rules  relating  to  the  subjects  mentioned  in  this  rule  for  the  different  services 
have been issued separately by the departments concerned. 
           Note 2.–This rule in so far as it provides for the number and character of posts and their 
rates  of  pay  to  be  determined  by  rule  cannot  suitably  be  applied  in  respect  of  all  ministerial 
and petty officers and Group ‘D’ employees. Accordingly these Government employees have 
been excluded from the operation of this rule to that extent.  
 

194 
[14.4-14.7]                            THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XIV] 
 
           Note  3.–The  extent  up  to  which  the  various  departments  and  heads  of  departments  or   
their  subordinate  authorities  exercise power in respect of the creation or abolition of  both 
permanent  and  temporary  posts  and  the  varying  of  emoluments  of  posts  are  given  in      
Chapter XV. 
           Note 4.–Although a competent authority has full power to create posts and to fix the pay 
thereof  under this rule, the  sanction of the  Government of  India  is  necessary to the  holding in 
abeyance of a post borne on the cadre of the All-India Services, and the creation in its place of a 
temporary post of different status. 
           Note  5.–(a)  Short  term  vacancies,  the  duration  of  which  exceeds  two  months  by  an 
appreciable  margin,  may  be  filled  up  in  the  normal  manner  by  the  authorities  competent  to 
make appointments against the posts. 
            (b)  Officiating  promotions  in  vacancies  of  two  months’  duration  or  less  continuous 
chain of vacancies in the same grade, each of a duration of two months or less but which taken 
together extend  beyond  two  months,  should  not  as  a  rule  be  made  save  in  very  exceptional 
circumstances with the prior approval of the Administrative Secretary concerned in the case of 
Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ appointments  and  of  the  Head  of  Department  in  the  case  of Group 
‘C’ and Group ‘D’ appointments: 
            Provided  that  no  leave  vacancy,  of  less  than  one  month  duration  will  ordinarily  be 
filled  in  the  Punjab  Vidhan  Sabha  Secretariat  and  also  that  these instructions  will  not  be 
applicable during its Session days. 
         (b)      STATE SERVICES, GROUP ‘A’ AND GROUP ‘B’ AND       
SPECIALIST SERVICES 
          14.5. The State Services, Group ‘A’ and  Group ‘B’ consist of such services as 
the  competent  authority  may  from  time  to  time  declare  by  notification  in  the Punjab 
Gazette to be included in Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’ Services. 
          Note.  Omitted. 
           14.6. The Specialist Services shall consist of such services (other than All-India 
and  State  Services, Group ‘A’ and Group ‘B’)  as the  Government  may  from  time  to 
time by notification in the Punjab Gazette declare to be Specialist Services. 
(c)  OTHER SERVICES 
          14.7. State  Services, Group  ‘C’ and ‘D’,  include  persons  to  whom  these  rules 
apply and who are not already included in any of the services  comprised in class (i), 
(ii) and (iii) of rule 14.1. 
 

195 
                                  SECTION II. CONDUCT AND DISCIPLINE 
           14.8. A  competent  authority  may  make  rules  to  regulate  the  conduct  of  the 
members of the State Services, Group ‘A’,  Group ‘B’ and  Group ‘C’ and holders of 
special posts. 
           Note.–Rules issued under this rule are contained in Appendix 23 to these rules. 
       SECTION III.  PUNISHMENT AND APPEALS 
          14.9. A competent authority may issue rules specifying the penalties which may 
be  imposed  on  members  of  the  services  and the procedure  for  preferring  appeals 
against the imposition of such penalties.  
           Note. Omitted. 
                                       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[Chap. XIV]         CLASSIFICATION OF SERVICES       [14.8-14.9] 

196 
 
                                         CHAPTER XV 
 
                    AUTHORITIES WHICH EXERCISE THE POWERS OF  
                    A COMPETENT AUTHORITY UNDER THE VARIOUS  
                    RULES. 
 
          15.1.  With reference  to  rule  2.14  the  following  authorities  shall  exercise  the 
powers of a competent authority under the various rules. 
           Note 1.–The following provisions apply in the matter of the creation of posts:– 
(i) The power to create a permanent post may, unless there exists a specific power 
in respect of similar temporary posts, be  held to cover a  temporary post  within 
the same limits. 
              (ii)     The term “pay” does not include “special pay”. 
  
(iii)    The  powers  to  create  posts  do  not  refer  to Group „D‟ establishment,  the  pay  of 
which is debitable to “Contingencies”. These are governed by the rules given in 
the Punjab Financial Rules, Volume I. 
(iv)    The  powers  in  regard  to  the  creation  of  posts  are  intended  to  be  exercised  in 
individual   cases   only.   Proposals involving   a   general   addition   to   the 
establishment  of  a  number  of  offices  should  be  referred  to  Department  of 
Finance. 
  (v)     In respect of delegations for creation of posts, fees or commissions which are the 
authorised  emoluments  of  the  post,  should  be considered  as  pay  or  part  of  the 
post for the purposes of determining the authority competent to the post. 
            Note   2.–The   Administrative   Departments   and   the   Heads   of   Departments   concerned   may 
redelegate  the  powers,  delegated  to  them  in  the  table below  this  rule,  to  any  officer  under  them  at  their 
headquarter offices on their own overall responsibility and subject to such conditions and restrictions as 
they  may  like  to  impose.  Copies  of  such  orders  should  invariably  be  endorsed  to  the  Department  of 
Finance  and  the  Accountant  General,  Punjab.  They  may  also  re-delegate  their  powers  in  respect  of  the 
following items in the manner indicated below:– 
 Serial number of the table below  
 this rule. 
     Authority to whom power may  be re-delegated. 
2, 4, 5, 11, 12, 34, 35, 38, 44, 45, 48, 
49, and 57. 
To any officer subordinate to them.  The Powers in respect of 
items  Nos.  44  and  45  may,  however,  be  re-delegated  only  in 
respect of Group „C‟ and Group „D‟ employees. 
8,  10,  14,  21,  23,  40,  41,  43,  47,  52 
and 54. 
 
To authorities competent to make appointments. 

197 
[Chap. XV]              CONSENT ORDERS           [15.1] 
 
Serial 
No. 
No. of Rule Nature of Power Authority to 
which the power 
is delegated 
Extent of power 
delegated. 
1 2 3 4 5 
1. Omitted.  
2. 
  
  
  
  
  
2.27 (b)  
  
  
  
  
Power to declare 
 a Government 
employee‟s 
headquarters.  
  
  
  
  
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of 
Departments  
Full    powers    in    case    of    all 
Government employees of 
Group „B‟, Group „C‟ and Group 
„D‟ and  also Group  „A‟ officers 
upto district level. 
Conservators of 
Forests 
Full  powers  in  respect  of  posts 
under  their  control  except  those 
of Divisional Forest Officers and 
equivalent posts. 
Divisional Forest 
Officers. 
Full   powers   in   case   of   those 
Government employees   whom 
they can appoint. 
Superintending 
Engineers in the 
Buildings and 
Roads and 
Irrigation 
Branches. 
Full powers in case of Group „C‟ 
and   Group   „D‟ Government 
employees under their control. 
Deputy Registrar,  
Co-operative 
Societies. 
Full powers in case of 
Government   employees   whom 
they or any authority subordinate 
to them can appoint. 
3. 
  
2.42 
  
Power  to  appoint 
a Government 
employee to 
officiate in a 
vacant post.  
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
Authority 
competent to 
make a 
substantive 
appointment to 
the post. 
Full powers. 
Election 
Commissioner, 
Punjab. 
Full    Powers    in    respect    of 
temporary   post    which   he   is 
competent to create. 

198 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
   
Principal Chief 
Conservator of 
Forests. 
Full    powers    for    all    posts 
except   in   respect   of   P.F.S., 
Group „A‟. 
Chief Engineer, 
Irrigation Works. 
  
Full  powers  in  respect  of  the 
posts  under  his  control  except 
those of Superintending 
Engineers or equivalent posts. 
Full  powers  except  in  respect 
of  posts  of  the  rank  of  Sub-
Divisional Officers and above. 
Director of  
Industries, 
Punjab. 
Full    powers    to    appoint    a 
Government employee to 
officiate in a vacant post for 3 
months in case of appointment 
of  all Group  „C‟  and  Group 
„D‟ staff. 
4. 
 
 
 
2.53 
 
 
 
Powers to   define 
the    limits    of    a 
Government 
employee‟s  sphere 
of duty 
  
  
  
  
Department of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of  
Departments. 
Full   powers   in   case   of   all 
Government    employees    of 
Group  „B‟, Group  „C‟  and 
Group „D‟ and also Group „A‟ 
officers upto district level. 
Conservators 
 of Forests. 
Full powers in respect of posts 
under    their    control    except 
those    of    Divisional    Forest 
Officers and equivalent posts. 
Divisional 
Forest Officers. 
Full powers  in  case  of  those 
Government employees whom 
they can appoint. 
Superintending 
Engineers in  the 
Public Works 
Departments. 
Full  powers  in  case  of  those 
Government employees whom 
they can appoint. 
Deputy Registrar,       
Co-operative 
 Societies. 
Full    powers    in    case    of 
Government employees whom 
they or any authority 
subordinate     to     them     can 
appoint. 
4-A. Schedule to  
Chapter II, 
Paragraph 
  I(vi)   
Power to treat 
compulsory    
waiting period   
as duty. 
Administrative 
Departments. 
Upto 30 days 

199 
[Chap. XV]            CONSENT ORDERS          [15.1] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
5. 
  
Schedule to  
Chapter II, 
Paragraph 
1(vii) 
  
Power to permit a 
Government 
employee to 
appear in an 
optional 
examination. 
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of  
Departments. 
Full     powers     in     respect          
of  Group  „B‟,  Group  „C‟   
and  Group  „D‟  Government 
employees. 
6. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Schedule to 
Chapter II, 
Paragraph  
II (5). 
  
  
  
  
  
  
Power to sanction 
the absence of a 
Government 
employee on duty 
beyond sphere of 
duty.  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
(i)  Departments      
of Government. 
Full    powers    for    absence 
within India. 
(ii)  Heads of 
Departments.  
Full   powers   in   individual 
cases  for  reasons  of  public 
nature   to   be   specified   in 
writing: 
Provided:– 
 (i)   the   absence   does   not  
exceed 60 days; and 
(ii)   is within India. 
(iii)  Controlling 
Officers. 
  
Full   powers   in   individual 
cases  for  reasons  of  public 
nature   to   be   specified   in 
writing: 
Provided:– 
 (i) The absence does not 
exceed 30 days; and 
(ii) is within Punjab State. 
  (iv) Deputy  
Commissioners 
Full  powers  to  allow  IAS/ 
PCS  officers  serving  under 
them   to   perform   journeys 
beyond  their  sphere  of  duty 
for     attending     courts     as 
witnesses   in   their   official 
capacity    to    places    within 
Punjab. 
(v)  Heads of  
       Offices. 
  
  
Full   powers   in   individual 
cases,  for  reasons  of  public 
nature   to   be   specified   in 
writing:  
        Provided :‒ 
(i)   the   absence   does   not 
exceed 15 days; and 
(ii)  is within Punjab. 

200 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
7. Schedule to 
Chapter II, 
Paragraph 
11(5). 
Powers to sanction 
absence of block 
personnel (except 
Village Level 
Workers) and staff 
of Gram Sewaks 
Training Centres 
and allied wings 
beyond their sphere 
of duty for training 
in India. 
Financial 
Commissioner, 
Development 
 and Secretary to 
Government, 
Punjab, 
Development and 
Panchayat 
Department. 
Full powers provided the 
absence  does  not  exceed  three 
months. 
8. 3.2 Powers to dispense 
with the production 
of medical 
certificate of fitness. 
Departments  
of Government. 
Full powers in individual cases. 
9. Omitted. 
10. Omitted. 
11. 3.23 Power to relax the 
provisions of the 
rule 3.22.  
Departments of 
Government. 
Full  powers  provided  the  place 
of  making  over  charge  is  within 
Punjab. 
Heads of 
 Departments 
 and other  
authorities  
competent to 
 grant leave. 
Full    powers    in    respect    of 
Government employees to 
whom   they   are   competent   to 
grant  leave  including Group  „B‟ 
officers     provided place of 
making  over/taking  over  charge 
is within Punjab. 
12. 3.24 Power to declare 
that proviso (a) to 
rule 3.23 is not 
applicable to any 
particular case. 
Departments 
 of Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of 
Departments  
and other  
authorities 
competent to 
grant leave. 
Full    powers    in    respect    of 
Government employees to 
whom   they   are   competent   to 
grant  leave  including Group „A‟ 
officers   provided   the   place   of 
making  over/taking  over  charge 
is within Punjab 
13. Omitted.  
14. 4.3 Power to grant the 
pay and allowances 
of a Government 
employee treated as 
on duty under rule 
2.16(b). 
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of  
Departments and 
Superintending 
Engineers in the 
Irrigation Branch. 
In individual cases of Group „C‟ 
and   Group   „D‟ Government 
employees  only  whom  they  can 
appoint  without  reference  to  the 
higher authority. 
15. Omitted.  
16. Omitted.   

201 
[Chap. XV]           CONSENT ORDERS            [15.1] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
17. Note 6 
below 
rule 
4.4 
Power to issue 
a declaration as 
to the relative 
degree of 
responsibility 
attaching to 
two posts in 
case of doubt. 
Departments of Government 
and Heads of  Departments. 
The  certificate  will  be  issued  by 
the   Administrative   Department 
concerned  in  respect  of  the  new 
post,   in   cases   where   the   two 
posts are in different 
departments  and  by  the  Head of 
Department  where  the  Head  of 
Department   is   the   appointing 
authority. 
18. 
 
 
 
4.7 
  
  
  
Power to 
withhold 
increments. 
  
  
  
(i)   Authorities   specified   in 
the service rules. 
To  the  extent  specified  in  the 
Service Rules  
(ii) Authorities competent       
to make substantive 
appointment    to    the    post 
which the Government 
employee holds   where   no 
service    rules    have    been 
issued. 
Full Powers. 
(iii) Deputy Inspectors- 
General  of  Police,  Assistant 
Inspector   General,   Railway 
Police, Superintendents of 
Police, Assistant  Superinten-
dent  of  Railway  Police  and 
Deputy   Superintendents   in-
charge   of   Railway   Police 
Sub-Divisions. 
As provided in the Police Rules, 
in  the  case  of  the  Subordinate 
ranks of the Police Force. 
 (iv) Heads of  Offices In    the    case    of Group   „D‟ 
Government  employees  upto  a 
maximum period of three years. 
19 
 
4.10 
  
Power to grant 
premature 
increments to         
a Government 
employee in     
a time-scale of 
pay in order to 
fix initial pay 
in excess of            
the amount 
permissible 
under rules 4.4 
and 4.14. 
Departments of  Government Full   powers   in   the   following 
cases     and     subject     to     the 
following conditions:– 
(a)  In cases where the individual 
concerned   does   not   apply   for 
benefit    under    rule    4.10    for 
fixation  of  his  pay  within  two 
months  of  the date  on  which  the 
occasion for refixation of his pay 
arises,    no    arrears    shall    be 
allowed in respect of the periods 
prior  to  the  date  of application  

202 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
 
 
 
  
. 
  
  
. 
  
  
or,  if  there  is  no  such  application, 
the  date  of  first  reference  by  the 
Head of Office.  
(b)  In  cases  other  than  cases  of  re-
employment after resignation, 
removal   or   dismissal   from   the 
public service where a Government 
employee  has  previously  rendered 
service in a post in the higher time 
scale in an officiating or temporary 
capacity,  his  service  in  a  higher 
post  may  be  allowed  to  count  for 
purposes    of    increments    in    the 
lower  post  but  in  the  case  of  such 
service    rendered    against    work 
charged    post    benefit    may be 
allowed   of   only   half   of   such 
service  for  increments in the  lower 
post. 
(c)   Where   the   minimum   of   the 
scale  of  the  lower  post  is  greater 
than  the  minimum  of  the  scale  of 
the  higher  post  the  benefit  claimed 
should    be     allowed     with     the 
concurrence    of    Department    of 
Finance on the merits of each case. 
(d) Where    the    Public    Service 
Commission/Subordinate Services 
Selection   Board   recommends   a 
higher   start   in   fixing   the   initial    
pay   by   allowing   not   more   than  
five advance increments the 
Administrative    Department    may 
sanction  the  pay  so  recommended 
for a period up to six months with a 
stipulation to the effect that the pay 
would   be   finally   fixed   by   the 
Department  of  Finance  and  if  pay 
finally  fixed  is  less,  no  recovery 
would   be   effected   in   respect   of   
the  initial  period  up  to  six  months.  
In cases where more than            
five advance increments are 
recommended,   prior   approval   of 
Department    of    Finance    should     
be sought. 

203 
[Chap. XV]             CONSENT ORDERS          [15.1]                     
   
1 2 3 4 5 
19-A 4.10 Powers to grant 
advance increment 
to the officers who 
go abroad to 
improve their 
qualifications. 
Departments of 
Government. 
Full     powers     subject     to     the 
condition that the procedure 
provided   in   Chief   Secretary   to 
Government, Punjab Circular letter 
No. 961-4GS-62/5594, dated   the 
16
th
 February, 1962 is followed. 
20. Proviso 
to Rule 
4.13 
Power to decide 
whether officiating 
pay should or 
should not be 
given in case of 
Clerical and 
Subordinate posts 
not borne on 
Provincial scales. 
Heads of Offices. Subject to  the principles  laid down 
in rule 4.13. 
       Note: Officiating appointments   
in    the    offices    of    the    Deputy 
Commissioners   are   regulated   by 
the special orders relating thereto. 
21. 4.16 Power to reduce 
the  pay of 
officiating 
Government 
employees. 
Heads  of 
Departments. 
Full powers. 
Controller of 
Stationery and 
Printing. 
In respect of officiating 
Government  employees  employed 
on  technical  establishment  in  the 
Punjab Government Presses. 
22. 4.1, 
4.20 
and 
4.21 
Power to fix pay. Heads of  
Departments, 
Superintending 
Engineers, Public 
Works Department, 
Irrigation Branch 
Conservators of 
Forests and Election 
Commissioner. 
In    respect    of    temporary    posts 
which they are specifically 
authorised to create. 
23. 
  
4.22 
  
Power  to  appoint  a 
Government 
employee   to   hold 
temporarily   or   to 
officiate   in   more 
than one post.  
Departments of 
Government,  
Speaker, Punjab 
Legislative 
Assembly. 
Full powers. 
Heads of  
Departments. 
Full  powers  in  respect  of Group 
„C‟  and  Group  „D‟ Government 
employees. 
24 to 32.  Omitted 
33. 5.35(b) 
and 
5.35 (c) 
Powers to waive or 
reduce the amount 
of rent to be 
recovered from 
any Government  
Departments 
of Government. 
Full   powers   in   types   of   cases 
enumerated  in  Note  1  below  rule 
5.35. 

204 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
  
employee   or   class  
of Government 
employees     or     to 
waive  or  reduce  the 
amount   of   munici-
pal  and  other  taxes 
not  being  house  or 
property   tax   to   be 
recovered  from  any 
Government 
employee. 
Heads of 
Departments.  
Full  powers  in  respect  of Group 
„C‟  and  Group  „D‟ employees 
whom  they  can  appoint  in  types 
of cases enumerated in rule 5.35. 
34. 
 
5.38 
 
Power   to   sanction 
remission    of    rent 
when  a  building  is 
uninhabitable. 
  
Departments of 
Government.  
Full   powers   in   types   of   cases 
enumerated  in  Note  1  below  rule 
5.35. 
Heads of 
Departments.  
Full  powers  in  respect  of Group 
„C‟  and  Group  „D‟ employees 
whom  they  can  appoint  in  types 
of cases enumerated in rule 5.35. 
35. 
 
 
5.47 
 
 
Power to direct    
that   a   Government 
employee   on   leave 
shall be in 
occupation of a 
residence. 
  
  
Departments of 
Government  
Full   powers   in   types   of   cases 
enumerated in  Note  1  below  rule 
5.35. 
Heads of  
Departments  
Full powers in  respect of – 
(a)  Group „C‟ and Group „D‟ 
Government employees; 
(b) Group „B‟ officers; and   
(c) Group „A‟ officers up to   
district level. 
Chief Engineers, 
Public  Works  Depa-
rtments, Building and 
Roads, and  Superin-
tending Engineers  in 
the Irrigation Branch.  
Full     powers     in     respect     of 
residences    under    their    control 
occupied by Group „C‟ and Group 
„D‟ Government employees. 
36 to 37. Omitted. 
38. 
  
  
  
5.55 
  
  
  
Powers  to  grant  or 
permit    a    Govern-
ment   employee   to 
receive honorarium. 
Departments of 
Government. 
Upto  a  maximum  of  Rs. 2,000  if 
the  service  rendered  falls  within 
the  course  of  the  ordinary  duties 
of    the    Government    employee 
concerned and in other cases upto 
Rs. 10,000 in each individual case 
during a financial year.  

205 
[Chap. XV]             CONSENT ORDERS          [15.1]                     
   
1 2 3 4 5 
   
Heads  of 
Departments. 
  
(i)  Upto a maximum of Rs. 2,500 
in  each  individual  case  during 
a  financial  year, provided  the 
service  rendered  does  not  fall 
within    the    course    of    the 
ordinary duties of the 
Government employee. 
(ii) Full   powers   in   respect   of 
setting    up    of    examination 
papers,    and    evaluation    of 
answer sheets including     
those    relating    to    practical 
examination, and in respect of 
payment    to    invigilators    or 
supervisors  and  for holding  of 
part-time classes subject to the 
condition  that  the  rates  have 
been approved by the 
Department of Finance. 
39. Omitted. 
40. 
 
 
 
5.57 
  
  
  
Power   to   sanction 
the  taking  of  work 
for  which  a  fee  is 
offered and the 
acceptance    of    the 
fees thereof – 
(i) to the Group „A‟ 
Officers not below 
the rank of Additi-
onal or Joint Heads 
of  Departments. 
Departments of 
Government. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Full powers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) to the Group „A‟ 
and     Group     „B‟ 
Officers  other   than 
Group  „A‟  Officers 
referred   to  in   sub-
clause  (i) above. 
Heads of 
Departments.  
Full powers 
(iii)   to Group  „C‟ 
and Group     „D‟ 
Government emplo-
yees  working  under 
the Heads of 
Offices. 
Heads of Offices. Full Powers 

206 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
41. 7.3(4), 
7.3-A(2) 
and 
7.3-B(5) 
Power     to     determine   
the  amount  of  pay  and 
allowances  which  may 
be paid to the 
Government employee. 
The authority 
competent to order 
re-instatement of 
the Government 
employee. 
Full powers. 
42. 7.3-B(7) Power     to     treat     the 
period    of    suspension    
of the Government 
employee   as a   period 
spent  on  duty  for  any 
specified purpose. 
The authority 
competent to order 
reinstatement of 
the Government 
employee. 
Full powers. 
43. 8.18 Powers   to   grant   leave   
to a Government 
employee  in  respect  of 
whom a medical 
committee  has  reported 
that there is no 
reasonable prospect that 
he  will  ever  be  fit  to 
return to duty. 
Departments 
 of Government. 
 
Full powers in respect of 
Group „A‟ and Group „B‟ 
officers. 
Heads of 
Departments. 
 
Full   powers   in   respect   of 
Group  „C‟  and  Group  „D‟ 
Government employees. 
44. 8.23 Powers to grant leave. Departments  
of Government. 
Full powers. 
45. 
 
8.27  
and  
8.28 
 
Power  to  direct  in  any 
case  otherwise  than  as 
laid  down  in  rules 8.27 
and 8.28. 
Departments 
 of Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of 
Departments  
In   respect   of   Government 
employees  to  whom  they  are 
competent to grant leave. 
Conservators  
Of Forests. 
46. 8.29 To  grant  permission  to 
prefix  or  affix  vacation 
to leave  in  cases  where 
the combination of 
vacation with leave 
involves  extra  expense 
to Government. 
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
47. 
 
8.33 
 
Powers to decide          
in doubtful or 
inequitable  cases  which 
Government    employee 
shall   be   held   to   have 
been   incharge   and   to 
whom   the   pay   of   the 
post    for    Sunday    or 
holidays shall be paid. 
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
Heads of 
Departments. 
Full   powers   in   respect   of 
Group  „B‟,  Group  „C‟  and 
Group     „D‟     Government 
employees. 

207 
[Chap. XV]             CONSENT ORDERS          [15.1]                     
   
1 2 3 4 5 
48. 
 
 
8.41 (b) 
 
 
Powers to grant 
permission to a 
Government employee 
on leave to accept 
employment or to take up 
service.  
 Departments 
 of Government. 
Full powers. 
Speaker, Punjab 
Legislative 
Assembly. 
Heads of 
Departments. 
Full   powers   in   respect   of 
Group  „B‟,  Group  „C‟  and 
Group „D‟ Government 
employees. 
49. 
 
 
 
8.47 
 
 
 
Power   to   extend   leave 
overstayed. 
  
  
  
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
The authority 
granting the 
leave. 
Upto 14 days out of India and 
7 days in India. 
Heads of 
Departments. 
Upto 90 days. 
Chief Engineers 
Buildings and 
Roads and Public 
Health. 
Full   powers   in   the   case   of 
Officers    of    the    rank    of 
S.D.Os.   Assistant   Executive 
Engineers, other  officers  upto 
the rank of Executive 
Engineers.  
50. Paragraph 
2(ii) 
annexure 
to section 
1, Chapter 
VIII. 
Power  to  decide  in  case 
of     doubt     whether     a 
particular Government 
employee  is  serving  in  a 
vacation Department. 
Departments  
of Government. 
Full powers. 
51. Omitted. 
52. 8.137 Extraordinary leave. 
 
Departments of 
 Government 
Upto two years 
 
Heads of 
Departments. 
Upto one year 
53. 9.7 Power    to    permit    the 
calculation     of     joining 
time   by   a   route   other 
than that which travellers 
habitually use. 
Heads of 
Departments. 
Full powers. 
54. 9.19(a) Power  to  grant  extension 
of joining time. 
Departments of 
Government. 
Full powers. 
55. 10.2(b) Power     to     transfer     a 
Government employee to 
foreign service in India. 
  
Departments of 
Government. 
Full   powers subject   to   the 
conditions in Serial No.56. 
 
Heads of 
Departments 
Director of Health 
Services 
Full     powers     to     transfer 
Medical   Officer   to   foreign 
service under local bodies. 

208 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
56. 10.4 Power   to   fix   pay   in 
foreign service. 
(a) Departments     
     of Government. 
Full   powers   subject   to   the 
conditions     laid     down     in 
Annexure  „A‟ to   Chapter X. 
(b)  Heads of     
Departments. 
Full   powers   in   the   case   of 
those  Government  employees 
whom  they  can  appoint  and 
subject  to  the  conditions laid 
down   in   Annexure „A‟ to 
Chapter X. 
(c)  Director of 
Health Services 
  
Full   powers   in   the   case   of 
Medical  Officer  transferred  to 
foreign   service   under   local 
bodies  provided  the  pay  fixed 
is  not  in excess  of  that  drawn 
in Government service;   and 
provided     further     that     no 
concessions  are  sanctioned  in 
addition to pay except – 
  (1) Payment   by   the   foreign 
employer of Government 
share    of    the    contribution 
towards New Defined 
Contributory Pension Scheme. 
(2) Grant of free quarters or an 
allowance at the rate specified 
in sub-rule (4) of rule 5. 
57. Rule 
10.18 
Powers to   decide   the 
date  of  reversion  of  a 
Government    employee 
returning    after    leave 
from foreign service. 
Heads of 
Departments.  
Full powers. 
58 to 65                         Omitted. 
PUNJAB VIDHAN SABHA SECRETARIAT 
66.                    Note 2 
under 
rule 
14.4 
To    create    temporary 
posts    of – 
(a)  Watch and Ward   
       Assistants upto 10. 
(b) Telephone  
Attendants  upto 10. 
(c)  Telephone 
Messengers upto 10. 
Secretary, Punjab  
Vidhan Sabha.  
(a) For  the  duration of  Punjab 
Vidhan    Sabha    Session; 
and 
(b) The   pay   and   allowances 
shall    not    in    any    case 
exceed the rates 
admissible for similar 
posts  in  the  Punjab  Civil 
Secretariat or Punjab 
Vidhan Sabha Secretariat. 

209 
[Chap. XV]             CONSENT ORDERS          [15.1]                     
   
1 2 3 4 5 
     ADMINISTRATION  OF JUSTICE 
67.  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Note 
2 
under 
rule 
14.4 
(a)      To   create   new   permanent 
ministerial  posts  required  for  the 
High  Court  and  courts  subordinate 
thereto. 
The Hon‟ble 
Judges of 
the High 
Court 
The  pay  of  the  posts  shall not 
exceed the sanctioned scale of 
the  corresponding  permanent 
posts. 
(b) To create new permanent posts 
in the process Serving 
Establishment    required    for    the 
High Court and Courts 
Subordinate thereto. 
      Ditto The  pay  of  the  posts  shall not 
exceed the sanctioned scale of 
the  corresponding  permanent 
posts. 
 
(c) To create new permanent posts 
in the Group „D‟ Establishment 
required for the High Court and 
Courts subordinate thereto. 
Ditto The  pay  of  the  posts  shall     
not   exceed the sanctioned   
scale of the corresponding 
permanent posts. 
(d) To create temporary ministerial 
and Group  „D‟ posts  required  for 
the     High     Court     and     Courts 
subordinate thereto. 
The Hon‟ble 
Judges of 
High Court 
 (i)  the  pay  attached  to  such 
posts  shall  be  in  accordance 
with the sanctioned scales for 
the permanent posts. 
(ii)  Within  the  financial  year 
unless the pay is according to 
the  scale  laid  down  in  items 
(a) (b) and (c) above.  
(e)      To   create   the   posts of a 
messenger  for  each  district  Court 
when  the  amount  of  station dak  to 
be dealt with appears to render this 
necessary. 
Ditto Pay to be in the usual scale. 
(f)  Omitted. 
(g)  To  create  temporary  posts  on 
the scale given below for courts of 
temporary each Additional District 
and Sessions Judge:– 
(a)  Reader                   –  One 
(b)  Judgement Writer 
      (Senior grade)        –  One 
(c)  Stenographer         –  One 
(d)  Translator              –  One 
(e)  Ahlmad                  –  One 
(f)   Copy Clerk            –  One 
District and 
Sessions 
Judge. 
(i)  Pay not to exceed – 
(a)  Reader  Rs.  10300-34800+  
5000 Grade Pay; 
(b)  Judgement  Writer  (Senior 
Grade) Rs.10300-34800+ 
      4200 Grade Pay; 
(c) Stenographer  Rs.  10300-
34800+3800 Grade Pay; 
(d)   Translator Rs. 10300-
34800+ 3800 Grade Pay; 
(e) Ahlmad Rs. 10300-
34800+ 3200 Grade Pay;  
(f)   Copy   Clerk   Rs.   10300-
34800+ 3200 Grade Pay; 

210 
 
[15.1] THE PUNJAB CIVIL SERVICES RULES VOLUME I (PART I) [Chap. XV] 
   
1 2 3 4 5 
  
(g)  Usher            –  One 
(h)  Peon             –  Two 
 (g)  Usher Rs. 4900-10680+1400  
       Grade Pay; and 
(h)  Peon Rs. 4900-10680+1300   
       Grade Pay. 
(ii)  The  period  of  appointment  shall 
be  for  so  long  as  the  posts  of 
temporary  Additional  District  & 
Session     Judges     are     created 
subject  to  the  limit  that sanction 
shall   not   be   given   to   extend 
beyond   the   last   day of   the 
financial year. 
(h)  To  create  temporary 
posts  on  the  scale  given 
below     for     courts     of 
temporary each 
Additional Sub Judge: – 
(a)  Reader- One 
(b)  Judgement Writer    
(Junior grade) – One 
(c)  Ahlmad –One 
(d)  Naib Nazir–One 
(e)  Peon –Two 
  
  
District and 
Sessions 
Judge. 
 
 
(i)    Pay not to exceed – 
(a) Reader   Rs.   10300-34800+3800 
Grade Pay; 
(b)   Judgement Writer  (Junior      
       Grade) Rs. 10300-34800+ 3800   
       Grade Pay; 
(c)   Ahlmad Rs. 10300-34800+ 3200    
       Grade Pay; 
(d)   Naib Nazir 10300-34800+ 3200 
Grade Pay; and 
(e)   Peon  Rs.4900-10680+1300  
       Grade Pay; and 
(ii) The  period  of  appointment  shall 
be   for   so   long   as   the   post   of 
temporary Additional  Sub  Judge  is 
created   subject   to   the   limit   that 
sanction  shall  not  be  given  to  extend 
beyond  the last  day  of  the  financial 
year: 
         Provided  that a Naib-Nazir  is 
entertained    only    if    held    to    be 
necessary by the District and Sessions 
Judge. 
(i) To  create  the 
temporary post of a 
steno-typist for the  
court of  Sub-Judge-cum-  
Judicial Magistrate. 
District and 
Session 
Judges 
  (i) The  pay  of  the  posts  shall  not 
exceed  the  sanctioned  scale  of 
the corresponding   permanent 
post. 
 (ii)  The period shall be for  so  long   
as   the  post  of  the Sub-Judge- 

211 
[Chap. XV]                 CONSENT ORDERS          [15.1]                     
   
1 2 3 4 5 
  
 
 
  
cum-Judicial  Magistrate  exists, 
subject to the limit that sanction 
shall   not   be   given   to   extend 
beyond the   last   day   of   the 
financial year. 
   (iii) Provided that the post   of 
Copyist/Naib Nazir/Execution 
Clerk  is  kept  in  abeyance  for 
the  period  for  which  a  Steno-
typist‟s post is created. 
(j)  To  create  temporary 
posts    of    Bailiffs    for 
execution work in 
connection    with    appli-
cations  made   to Courts 
on behalf of Cooperative                    
Societies. 
District and 
Sessions Judge 
Provided:– 
(i) the pay attached to such post 
is    in    accordance    with    the 
sanctioned scales: 
(ii) the   pay   plus   leave   and 
pension contribution in 
accordance  with  the  rate  fixed 
for  the  Punjab  Government  are 
recovered   from   the societies 
concerned. 
(k)  To  create  temporary 
posts  required  for  courts 
of Chief Judicial 
Magistrate   and   Judicial 
Magistrate : – 
(a) Reader–One 
(b) Judgement Writer  
(Junior grade)–One 
(c) Ahlmad –One 
(d) Steno-typist –One 
(e) Peon –Two 
 
 
District and 
Sessions Judges. 
  
  (i)  Pay not to exceed – 
 (a) Reader Rs.  10300-34800+ 
4200 Grade Pay; 
  (b)  Judgment Writer 
  (Junior  Grade)  Rs.  10300-
34800+3800 Grade Pay; 
  (c)  Ahlmad Rs. 10300-34800 +   
         3200 Grade Pay; 
  (d)   Steno-typist: Rs. 5910-
20200 + 2800 Grade Pay;   
  (e)   Peon  Rs. 4900-10680 + 
         1300 Grade Pay; and  
(ii)  The  period  of  appointment 
shall be for so long as the posts 
of temporary  Judicial Magist-
rates  are  created subject  to  the 
limit  that  sanction  shall  not  be 
given to  extend beyond  the  last 
day of the financial year. 
68 to 73 Omitted. 
   

212 
 
 

213 
                                                                   INDEX 
 This index has been compiled solely for the purpose of facility of reference. No expression 
in it should in any way be considered as any way interpreting the rules. 
                  A 
Rule 
Accountant-General―  
 
Definition of the term―      2.2 
Active Service― 
 
Definition of the term―      2.3 
Disability leave is included in the term 2.3,Note 
Actual Travelling expenses― 
 
Definition of term 2.4 
Age― 
 
―of Admission to service under Government 3.6 
―at which Government employees are required to retire  3.26,3.27 
Definition of the term― 2.5 
Agreement― 
 
 Punjab  Civil  Services  Rules  do  not  apply  to  persons  in  respect  of    whose 
conditions of service, etc., special provisions have  been made by― 
1.4(i) 
 Special provisions inconsistent with the Punjab Civil Services Rules may be 
made by-with any person to be appointed to a particular post 
1.3 
Air― 
 
Joining time admissible when a journey is performed by― 9.5 
Allotment― 
 
 ―of residences  5.46 
Determination of the period of―     5.48 
Allowance (s)― 
 
Date from and to which a Government employee draws pay and― of a post 3.19 
Effect upon―of combination of holidays with leave and joining time 8.27, 8.28 
Pay and―of a Government employee deputed out of India 6.2 
The term travelling―includes―granted for conveyances, horses and tents 2.62 
Apprentice―  
Definitions of the term― 2.6 
Kinds of leave admissible to an―          8.132 
 Service of an―counts as duty       2.16 (a) (1) 
 Assistant Legal Remembrancer(s)―Leave admissible to―     8.141 
 Assured Career Progression Scheme―  
 General Conditions for grant of―  4.8 
                                                       C 
 
Cadre― 
 
A Government employee should not ordinarily be substantively transferred to 
a post carrying less pay than his position in―would justify 
3.17 
Government employee transferred to foreign service  will remain in his―and 
may be given promotions 
10.3 

214 
 
                                         INDEX  
  Rule 
Definition of―     2.9 
Camp Equipage― 
 
Definition of―     2.10 
Camp Equipment―  
Definition of 2.11 
Capital Cost 
 
A  charge  of  4
1
/
2
 per  cent  of  the____to  be  made  to  cover  maintenance  of 
water-supply, sanitary and electric installations 
5.28 
Assessment of percentages on the―on account of ordinary and special 
repairs 
5.28 
Calculation of―of a residence when its value and the value of site on 
which it stands is not known 
5.17 
―for the assessment of rent of residences 5.15 
―includes expenditure on compound walls, fences, gates, roads,   etc. 5.16 (ii) 
―includes cost of sanitary, water-supply and electric installations 5.15 
―shall include cost of an expenditure on preparation of site  5.15 
―shall  not  take  into  consideration  any  charges  on  account  of      
Establishment and Tools and Plants    
5.19 
―to be reduced when table lamps,  table  fans,  etc.,  already  supplied  are 
rendered unserviceable     
5.22, Note 2 
Charges for special repairs such as renewal of floor, etc., to be provided in 
the form of percentages on the― 
5.27 and 5.28 
Circumstances under which a specified amount of―may be written off  5.21 
Cost of table lamps, table fans, etc., not included under “Electric Supply” 
to be included in the―when already supplied 
5.22 Note 2 
Determination of the―on the tennis court 5.44 
Determination of―of  
 Tennis  Court
Garden
  when not known                                            
5.44, Note 
Expenditure on compound walls, fences, gates, roads and culverts within a 
compound to be included in the―   
5.16 (ii) 
Re-calculation of rent forthwith when the―of a residence is written off  5.24 
Rent for furniture to be charged at 15 percent per annum on the― 5.44 
Renewals  necessitated by unforeseen calamities to be included in the―of 
residential buildings 
 
5.20 
What expenditure on the garden is to be included in the―of the residence 5.44 
Where  office  accommodation  is  provided  in  officer‟s  residence―of 
remainder to be separately estimated  
5.39 
Certificate(s)― 
 
Authority  prescribed  for  signing―of  fitness  to  return  to  duty  required 
from Government employees granted leave on account of ill health  
8.44 
―for  grant  of  house-rent  allowance  on  leave  or  temporary-transfer  for 
Government employees  
5.5                                                                                            

215 
                                         INDEX  
  Rule 
Form  of―of  fitness  in  the  case  of  Government  employees  on  leave  on 
medical certificate 
8.44 
Nature of―for  grant  of  compensatory  allowance  other  than house-rent 
allowance during leave or temporary transfer of Government employees   
5.3 
Supplementary―to be signed by an officer taking over charge of an  office 
entitling him to occupy a Government residential building 
5.49 
Charge of office― 
 
Circumstances  in  which  the  conditions  as  to  the  place  of  making over―or 
that both Government employees should be present may be relaxed 
3.23, 3.24 
Generally to be made over at headquarters both the relieving and the relieved 
Government employees being present 
3.22 
Joining    time    admissible    to    a    Government    employee    who    makes 
over―elsewhere than at his headquarters 
9.10 
Classification― 
 
of Government employees into various services 14.1 
Combination of holidays with leave― 
 
Effect of―on pay and allowances 8.27, 8.28 
When transfer of charge involves taking over of money―is inadmissible. 
exception allowed  
3.24 
Communications―  
Regarding   the   interpretation,   alteration   and   relaxation   of Punjab   Civil 
Services Rules to be forwarded through the Administrative Department. 
1.8, Note 
Compensatory Allowance(s)― 
 
Admissible  to  a  Government  employee  appointed  to  hold  or  to  officiate  in 
two or more independent posts at one time 
4.22, 5.1 
―includes travelling allowance      2.13 
―to be ordinarily drawn by the  Government  employee  on  duty  but  may 
under certain conditions be drawn during leave 
5.1 
Definition of the term― 2.13 
Drawal  of―other  than  house-rent  allowance  during  leave  or  Temporary 
transfer 
5.3 
Drawal of―Industrial or other employees whose leave terms are governed 
by special orders 
5.3(a),  
Note 
Inter-dependence of―and special pay not recognised 2. 52 
Explanation  
Reasons for grant of―to be recorded in sanctioning orders . 2.52, Note 1 
Rules relating to― 5.1 to 5.9 
When drawn in full  5.1 
Competent authority― 
 
Definition of the term―    2.14 
  

216 
 
 INDEX  
  Rule 
Comptroller and Auditor-General 
 
Prescribes forms of record of service  12.1 
Conduct and Discipline― 
 
Rules relating to―of various services 14.8 
Consent― 
 
Cases  in  which  the―of  the  Finance  Department  has  been  given  to  the 
exercise of powers by various authorities 
15.1 
 
Contract(s)― 
 
Leave admissible to Apprentices engaged on― 8.132(1) 
Leave admissible to probationers engaged on―   8.131(1) 
Leave admissible to Apprentices engaged otherwise than on―  8.132(2) 
Leave admissible to probationers engaged otherwise than on― 8.131(2) 
Leave on medical certificate to a Government employee engaged 
on―not to be granted for a period extending beyond the term of― 
 8.58 
Contribution(s)―  
 
Competent  authority  may  reduce  or  remit the  amount of―recoverable  on 
account  of  additions  to  a  regular  establishment  created  for  the  benefit  of 
other persons. 
10.20(1) 
―paid by a Government employee in foreign service maintain his claim to 
pension or leave salary 
10.12 
―towards the cost of pension and leave salary are payable on behalf of a 
Government employee transferred to foreign service. 
10.8 
―to be discontinued from the date of reversion of a Government employee 
from foreign service  
10.19 
Government   employees   on   foreign   service   in   local   fund   charitable 
Hospitals who are exempted from payment of leave and  pension 
10.8 
Interest  on  overdue―not  to  be  remitted  except  in  exceptional  
circumstances 
10.10 
Rates of interest leviable on overdue―  10.11 
Rates of―payable on account of pension and leave salary by Government 
employees in foreign service  
10.8 
Recovery of―on account of additions to a regular establishment created for 
the benefit of other persons 
10.20 
 
Refund of― not permissible 10.12 
Current Duties― 
 
A Government employee holding charge of the―of a post may be granted 
less pay than that admissible under the rules 
4.16, Note 1 
Pay  admissible  to  a  Government  employee  holding  charge  of  the―of 
another post, in addition to his own substantive post      
4.24 
Pay admissible to a Government employee holding charge of the―of a post 
after being relieved of those of his substantive post 
4.23 

217 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
                                                        D 
 
Date― 
 
―from which the Punjab Civil Services Rules came into force 1.1 
―from  which  a Government   employee   begins   to   draw   the   pay   and 
allowances attached to his post 
3.19 
―from which a Government employee recruited overseas begins to draw 
the pay and allowance attached to his post 
3.20 
Day― 
 
Definition of the term― 2.15 
Definition― 
 
―of terms used in the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume I,   II and III Chapter-II 
Delegations― 
 
General       15.1 
Departmental Sub-Registrar(s)― 
 
Leave admissible to― 8.144 
Deputation in India― 
 
Cases  in  which  Deputation  Allowance may  be  granted to  a  Government 
employee on ― 
10.21(1)(i) 
Circumstances  in which  Deputation  Allowance may  be  drawn during  the 
period of deputation extended beyond  three years  
2
nd
 Proviso to 
rule 10.25 
Creation  of  a  temporary  post is  necessary  for  a  Government  employee  on 
special duty or on― 
  4.21,  
Note 1 
Definition of term― 10.21(1) 
Rates of  deputation allowance    10.21(2) 
A Government  employee  on―either    be    allowed    special    pay    or  
the―allowance and not the both 
10.21(2) 
No  Government  employee who  goes on―on  foreign  service  should  be 
allowed higher start  
10.21(2) 
A Government employee on―on foreign service  may elect either pay of the 
new post or pay in the parent department plus deputation allowance 
10.22(2) 
 
The employee on―on foreign service  may  be given  the  benefit  of „next 
below rule‟ 
10.22(3) 
Project  allowance  admissible  in  any  project  area  may  be  drawn  in  addition 
to deputation allowance 
 
10.21(3) 
Benefit  of  special  rate of deputation allowance  where  such allowance  is 
admissible 
10.21(4) 
The deputation  allowance  shall  not  count  as  emoluments  for  any  purpose, 
however, it may count  as  emoluments for  pension  under  certain  specified 
conditions  
10.23 
In  the  case  of  employees  on―or  on  foreign  service  special  pay    
and―(duty)  allowance  will  be counted   with   effect   from 4.9.1973   as 
emoluments towards pension in the case of Punjab   Government employees 
on―to Central Government and vice versa  
10.23,  
Note I 

218 
 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
 Officiating pay drawn on―post with effect from 11-2-1974 to be  counted 
towards pension 
10.23,  
Note I 
Rules applicable to leave salary and pension contribution in the case of―of 
permanent  Government  employee  under  different  Governments  through 
open competition 
10.23,  
Note 2 
Extraordinary attractive concession not to be allowed to Punjab Government 
employees  on―on  foreign  service  to  private  bodies  without  the  prior 
approval of Finance Department   
10.24 
Period of―in the first instance 10.25 
Cases of―where Administrative Department should seek the approval of 
the Department of Personnel for extension in period of―beyond three years  
10.25 
Travelling allowance and daily allowance to the employees on―on foreign 
service   at   the   rate   admissible   to the   employees   of      the   borrowing 
organisation 
 
10.26 
Rates  of  House  rent  allowance  admissible  to  employees  on―on  foreign 
service  
10.27 
Rate  of  Deputation  Allowance  admissible  to employees on―on foreign 
service  on the same station and on a different station  
10.21(1)(ii) 
A  Government  employee  not  to  be allowed  to  proceed  again  on―or  on 
foreign service  unless he  has worked for a  minimum period of two years in 
his parent Government on reversion from the first assignment 
10.28 
Powers of Government to terminate―arrangements   10.28(2) 
Definition of basic pay for the purpose of―on foreign  service 10.21 
Personal pay to be allowed in addition during―on foreign service if it was 
drawn by an employee on the post in parent Government  
10.21(iv) 
Limits  to  be  applied  on―allowance  where  a  basic  pay  exceed  the  pay 
allowed under rule 4.16 
10.21 
Abnormal increase in pay on―post to be restricted 10.22(4) 
Deputation out of India― 
 
Authority who may sanction― 6.1 
Calculation of the period of― 6.2, Note 3 
Pay and allowance of a Government employee sent on― 6.2 
Pay  and  allowance  admissible  to  Police  Officers  on―to  accompany 
criminals, etc. 
6.2,  
Note1 
Rates of compensatory allowance to be granted to officers on― 6.2 
Dismissal― 
 
Pay  and  allowances  of  a  Government  employee  dismissed  from service 
ceases from the date of― 
7.1 
Pay  and  allowances  of  a  Government  employee  reinstated  after  suspension 
or― 
7.3(1) 
Previous service of a Government employee reinstated after―or removal 
counts for leave  
8.2(b) 

219 
                                        INDEX  
  Rule 
Duty(ies) ― 
 
A  government  employee  ordinarily  begins  or  ceases  to  draw  pay  and 
allowances from the date assumes charge of or ceases to discharge the―of 
a post 
3.19 
A  Government  employee  ceases  to  be  in  Government  employ  after  five 
years‟ continuous absence from ―otherwise than on foreign service 
3.25 
A Government employee on joining time is regarded as on― 9.15 
A Government employee is not on―during any time he may spend beyond 
his sphere of―except under certain circumstances  
Paragraph II of  
Schedule 
to Chapter II 
Acting  promotion  authorised in  place  of  Government  employee treated 
on―when pursuing a duly authorised course of training or instruction  
4.17, Note 
All―in  a  post  on  a  time-scale   counts   for   increments   in   that   scale 
circumstances  under  which  a  Government  employee  may  be    treated  as 
on―    
2.16(b) and 
Paragraph I of 
Schedule 
to Chapter II 
Definition of the term― 2.16(a) 
Foreign service counts as―for purposes of leave   8.1 
Leave is earned by―only 8.1 
Leave  on full pay  granted to part-time  law officers during  the  vacation of 
the High Court to be counted as― 
8.141(a) 
Power  of  competent  authority  to  allow  acting  promotions  to  be  made  in 
place of Government employee treated as on― 
4.17 
Previous service in local fund not administered by Government of a person 
transferred to Government service will not count as― 
11.3 
Reduction  of  the  pay  and  allowances  of  a  Government  employees  treated 
as on―under certain circumstances  
4.3 
Treatment  as―of  the  period  of  Government  employee  was  under 
suspension or was dismissed and was subsequently reinstated  
7.3(3), 
7.3(4) 
The  interval  between  the  date  of  report  by  a  Government  employee 
appointed outside  India on the  first arrival  in India  and the date  on  which 
he actually takes charge may be treated as― 
Paragraph 1(v) 
of the 
Schedule 
to Chapter II 
Time  spent  in  voyage  to India  by  a  Government  employee  recalled  from 
leave treated as―for calculating leave.. 
8.42(a)(ii) 
Treatment  as―of  the  period  of  journey  of  a  Government  employee 
recalled from leave in India 
8.42(b) 
Vacation counts as―for the purpose of leave  
8.59 
When a  relieving  Government  employee  is  regarded  as  on―and  not  on 
joining time  
9.16, 9.17 
Wilful absence from―after the expiry of joining time may be treated as 
misbehaviour  
9.18 

220 
 
                                        INDEX  
  Rule 
E 
 
Emoluments― 
 
Any―may specially be classed as pay by the competent authority  2.44(b) 
Assessment  of  rent  on  Government  residences  in  an  area  may be  made  at  a 
uniform percentage of― 
5.30 
―of a Government employee on leave for the purpose of assessment of rent 5.33, Note 2 
―taken  into  account  for  the  purpose  of  recovering  rent  for  residences 
supplied by Government. 
5.33 
Employment― 
 
―of Government employees on leave preparatory to retirement in trading 
concerns is open to objection 
8.41,  
Note 3 
No Government employee   on   leave   can   take   any   service   or   accept 
any―without obtaining sanction 
8.41 
 
Encashment of earned Leave―  
―to a Government employee on his retirement 8.21, 8.139 
―along with Leave Travel Concession while in service 8.22 
Engineer(s) ― 
 
An Apprentice―of the Thompson Engineering College Roorkee, is exempt 
from the production of medical certificate of health 
3.3(2) 
Examination(s)― 
 
Fixation  of  pay  of  a  Government  employee  officiating  in  a  post  the  pay  of 
which is subject to increase upon the passing of an― 
4.13,  
Note 7 
Time occupied in attending obligatory―is treated as duty. Paragraph I 
(vii) of 
Schedule 
to Chapter II 
Time occupied in attending optional―at which a Government  employee is 
permitted to appear by a competent authority is   treated as duty 
Paragraph 
I(viii) 
of Schedule 
to Chapter II 
Excise and Taxation Officer― 
 
An―acting  under  orders  of  the  Excise  and  Taxation  Commissioner  or 
Deputy  Excise  and  Taxation  Commissioner  or  the  Collector  beyond  his 
sphere of duty is treated as on duty 
Paragraph II(3) 
of  Schedule  to 
Chapter II 
Expenditure on site― 
 
Capital cost of a residence shall exclude― 5.15 
Works on which expenditure shall be considered as 5.16(1) 
Extent―  
―of the application of the Punjab  Civil Services Rules 1.2 to 1.4 
―of the application of the Revised Leave Rules 8.52 to 8.58 
                                                        F 
 
Family― 
 
Definition of the term― 2.17 

221 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
Adopted  children  not  included in the term―except those adopted under the 
Hindu Law  
2.17, Note 1 
Major sons and married daughters included in the term―so long as they are 
residing  with  and  wholly  dependent  on  the  parent  (Government  Employee) 
and subject to this condition, it includes widowed daughter also  
2.17, Note 2 
Fee(s) ― 
 
Acceptance of―by Medical Officers for professional attendance 5.57, Note 2 
Amount of―for private tuition how calculated 5.60 
Amount of―must be in proportion to value of service   5.57, Note 4 
Definition of the term― 2.18 
Officers   of   the   Education,   Agriculture,   and   Health   Department   may 
accept―up to certain limits for work of examining and setting  papers  in 
respect of University examinations  
5.57,  
Note 3 
Sharing  of  copying  and  urgent―by  attesting  and  revising   officers   of 
outlaying courts and officers of the Revenue Department 
5.59 
When should be credited to Government 5.58 
Female― 
 
Government employees may be granted maternity leave 8.127,8.137-A 
Medical  certificate  of  fitness  of  a  candidate  on  first appointment,  by  whom 
signed. 
3.4(2) 
Finance Department― 
 
Cases in which assent of the―is given to the exercise of the powers by the 
Administrative Department and the subordinate authorities 
15.1 
Definition of the term― 2.19 
Power of interpreting changing and relaxing the Punjab Civil Services Rules 
is vested in the― 
1.8 
Previous  approval  of―to  be  obtained  in  cases  where  combination  of 
vacation with leave involves extra expenditure 
8.26 
Fixed Monthly Emoluments― 
 
A  Government  employee,  except  a member  of    P.C.S  (Judicial  Branch), 
specialist  doctors  and  the  employees  covered  under  rule  4.4(a),  shall  be 
entitled to receive ―during his period of probation. 
4.1(1) 
―Definition of 4.1(1) 
Explanation 
Foreign Service― 
 
 A Government employee on―not to accept  a  pension  or  gratuity from  the 
foreign employer 
10.6(a) 
A Government employee on―in India cannot take leave or receive leave 
salary until he actually quits duty and goes on leave 
10.14 
A Government employee on―may not elect to withhold contributions 10.6 
A Government employee transferred to―will remain in his cadre and may 
be given promotions 
10.3(c) 

222 
 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
A  Government  employee  transferred  to―will draw  pay  from  the  foreign 
employer  from  the date  on  which  he  relinquishes  charge  of  his  post  in 
Government service 
10.4(a) 
A Government employee transferred to―is responsible for the  observance 
of the rules regulating his leave 
10.13 
A Government employee transferred to―must make himself acquainted with 
rules regulating his leave during such  service 
10.13 
Amount  of  pay  joining  time  and  pay  during  joining  time  of  a    Government 
employee  in―to  be  regulated  subject  to  the  restrictions  imposed  by  the 
competent authority 
10.4 
Authority to whom Government employee transferred to―should  submit his 
application for leave 
8.5 
Competent   authority   may   remit   contributions   payable   on   behalf   of   a 
Government employee in― 
10.2 (b) 
Conditions to be fulfilled before transfer of a Government employee to― 10.2 
Continuous absence from duty of over five years on―in India does not entail 
cessations in Government employ 
3.25 
Contribution  towards  the  cost  of  leave  salary  to  be  calculated  on  the  pay  of 
the Government employee in― 
10.8 
Contribution towards the cost of pension of a Government employee in―to 
be calculated on his pay in Government service 
10.8 
Contribution  towards  the  cost  of    pension  and  leave  salary  are    payable  on 
behalf of the Government employee transferred  to― 
10.8 
Date of reversion from―      10.18 
Definition of term― 2.21 
―counts as duty for purposes of  leave    8.1 
―counts for increment in the time-scale    4.9 (d) 
No  concession  or  remuneration  in  addition  to  pay  which  has  not  been 
specified in the order sanctioning the transfer to be granted to a Government 
employee transferred to― 
Paragraphs 
 1 to 4 
of Annexure A 
to Chapter X 
Government employee can be transferred to―against his will 10.2(a) 
Pay and any other remuneration or concession to be granted to a Government 
employee transferred to―should be precisely  specified 
Paragraphs 
 1 to 4  
of Annexure A  
to Chapter X 
Pay of a Government employee appointed to officiate in a Government post 
while on― 
10.5 
Rates  of  contribution  payable  on  account  of  pension  and  leave  salary  on 
behalf of Government employee in― 
10.8 
Rules regarding grant of leave to Government employees while  in 10.13 
Rules prescribing the  rate  of interest  leviable  on overdue Contribution from 
Government employees in― 
10.10 

223 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
Rules regarding the remission of interest  on  overdue  contributions  payable 
by a Government employee on― 
10.11 
When Government employee is in―, entries in service book to be made by 
Heads of Department or Office as the case may be 
12.4(2) 
A Government employee on―either  be  allowed  special  pay  or  deputation 
allowance 
10.21(2) 
Rates of Travelling Allowance and Daily Allowance admissible  during―  10.26 
Forest Department 
 
All  powers exercised  by  certain  officers  of  the  Public  Works  Department 
over  residences  under  its  control  are  also  exercised  by  certain  officers 
of―in the case of residences under the control of―  
5.52 
Fund― 
 
Liability  of  a  Government  employee  to  subscribe  to  a  provident―, family 
pension―or  other  similar―in  accordance  with  rules  prescribed  by  the 
competent authority 
3.18 
Furniture― 
 
How additional rent for―provided in a residence is to be determined 5.44 
                                                       G 
 
General Revenues― 
 
Contributions  to  be  paid  to―on  behalf  of  a  Government Employee 
transferred to foreign service 
10.8 
Definition of the term    2.23 
Government― 
 
Definition of the term― 2.24 
Government Pleader (s)― 
 
Leave admissible to― 8.142 
Government Press(es)― 
 
Leave allowances of a Government employee employed in a―who is paid 
under the piece work system  
8.146 
Leave  rules  applicable  to  permanent  salaried  and  industrial  employees  in 
the Punjab―who are not classed as Group „C‟ and „D‟ 
8.148 
Government employee(s)― 
 
A―on leave may not take any service or accept any employment without 
first obtaining necessary sanction  
8.41 
―who shares, by private arrangement, a residence  with another―is not 
included in the term “occupant” 
5.46 
 Note 
Whole time of a―is at the disposal of the Government which pays him  3.10 
Gratuity― 
 
A Government employee in foreign service not to accept pension or―from 
the foreign employer  
10.6(a) 

224 
 
                                         INDEX  
  Rule 
                                                        H 
 
Head(s) of Department (s) ― 
 
Definition of the term 2.25 
Head(s) of Office(s) ― 
 
Definition of the term 2.26 
Headquarters― 
 
Charge of office to be taken at―   3.22 
Definition of the term―  2.27 
Government employees are ordinarily required to reside within twenty-five 
kilometres of ―  
5.5(3) 
Joining  time  admissible  to  a  Government  employee  taking  over  charge  of 
office elsewhere than at his― 
9.10 
Transfer of charge of office elsewhere than at― 3.23 
Hill Stations― 
 
Places which have been declared to be― 2.28 
Holiday(s) ― 
 
A gazetted―to count as day allowed  for  joining  a  post  not involving  any 
change of station  
9.6 
Definition of―  2.29 
Effect of―on commencement and termination of leave  8.27, 8.28 
Effect of affixing―to joining time upon pay and allowances 8.28 
―can be prefixed or affixed to leave and joining time  8.26 
Local holiday―not included in the term „holiday‟       2.29, (Note) 
Honorarium (Honoraria)― 
 
―Amount of―must be in proportion to value of service 5.55, Note 4 
Circumstances under which an―may be granted  5.55 
Conditions of sanction of―    5.55 and 5.56 
Definition of the term― 2.30 
Grant of ―requires sanction of competent authority            5.55 
Leave earned by service recommended by―on daily wages 8.145 
Meeting   of   Boards   or   Committees   financed   wholly   or   partly   from      
Government revenues―no honorarium admissible 
8.145 
Reasons for the grant of―should be recorded in writing by the sanctioning 
authority  
5.55, Note 2 
Sanction for acceptance in the case of―when given  5.55 
When test of special merits is to be rigidly applied for grant of― 5.56 
House Rent― 
 
Drawal of―Allowance during leave or temporary transfer   5.5 
Drawal  of  additional―Allowance  when  rent  free  accommodation  is  not 
provided 
5.5 
Eligibility for the grant of ―Allowance 5.5 
Rates of―while on deputation in Foreign Service . 10.27 

225 
                                        INDEX  
  Rule 
Increment― 
 
A  Government  employee officiating  in  a  post,  the  pay  of  which has  been 
fixed  at  a  personal  rate  on  a  time-scale  of  pay  is  not  debarred  from 
drawing―in that time-scale  
4.15, Note 1 
Authority empowered to grant premature 4.10 
Calculation  of date  of ―to  officiating  Government  employee  who  draws 
more or less than that pay which is admissible under the rules  
4.16, Note 2 
Annual―to a Government employee shall be allowed with effect from the 
first day of the month  
4.9-A 
Conditions under which service counts for―in a time-scale   4.9 
Duty  rendered  in  an  identical  time-scale  governed  by  the  Civil  Service 
Regulations counts for―in one governed by these rules or vice-versa 
2.60, Note 
 and 4.9(a),  
Note 6 
Joining time taken by a Government employee under Rule counts for― 4.9 (e) 
Leave other than extraordinary leave counts for―in a time-scale 4.9 (b) 
Overstayal after leave does not count for―   4.9 (a), Note 3 
Proposal for the grant of premature―to be scrutinized with  special jealousy 4.10, Note 1 
Rules regarding the grant of―  4.7, 4.9,4.10 
When a Government employee who, while officiating to a post, proceeds on 
training  or  on  a  course  of  instruction  and  who  is treated  as  on  duty  while 
under training can count such period of duty for― 
4.9 (a),  
Note 2 
Grant of―in the case of premature promotions  4.7, Note 
Installation and fittings― 
 
Capital cost of a residence shall include the cost of―   5.15 
What comprise―for the purpose of Rule 5.15  5.22 
Instruction― 
 
A Government  employee  following  out  a  daily  authorised  Course of―is 
treated as on duty               
Paragraph (i) 
of Schedule to 
Chapter II 
Interest― 
 
Rates  of―leviable  on  the  overdue  contributions  payable  by Government 
employees on foreign service 
10.10 
Joining time― 
 
A  Government  employee  not  joining  his  post within the―is not entitled to 
pay or leave salary after the end of the― 
9.18 
A Government employee on―is regarded as on duty 9.15 
A Government employee taking leave during―has to allow portion of― 
elapsed to be included in such leave  
9.4 
A Government employee on transfer during a  vacation  may be permitted to 
take―at the end of the vacation 
9.3 
 

226 
 
                                           INDEX  
  Rule 
A  Government  employee  holding  a  temporary  post  if  offered  through  his 
official  superior  another post  at  some  other  station  at  any  time  before  the 
abolition of his post, is entitled to― 
9.1, 
Note 4 
A  ministerial  employee  is  not  entitled  to  be  paid  while  on―unless  his 
transfer is made in the public interest 
9.15,  
Note 1 
A road journey of eight kilometres or under, to or from railway station  from 
or to chief public office of the place, does not count   for― 
9.5 
A second period of six days for preparation not to be included in calculating 
the―of a Government employee whose  appointment  is  changed  while  in 
transit to another post  
9.11 
(Note) 
Calculation  of―admissible  to a  Government  employee  who  makes  over 
charge of office elsewhere than at his headquarters. 
9.10 
Calculation of―of a Government employee appointed to a new post while in 
transit from one post to another   
9.11 
Circumstances in which―may be granted to a Government employee  9.1 
Combination of holidays with leave and― 8.26-8.33 
Competent  authority  may  make  special  concessions  in―rules  in  certain 
cases 
9.19 
Date of expiry of leave  in  the case  of a  Government employee granted―on 
return from leave out of India 
8.25 
 
Definition of the term― 2.32 
Effect upon pay and allowances of combination of holidays with― 8.28 
How―calculated     9.5 
Inclusion or exclusion of Sundays in the calculation of― 9.5(e) 
―counts as duty      2.16(a)(2) 
―admissible  to persons   not   in   Government   service   on   joining   the 
Government service or on reversion from it 
9.20 
―admissible when vacation is combined with leave 9.3 
―limited to a maximum of 30 days 9.5 
No―admissible to a Government employees transferred from one post to 
another in the same office establishment 
9.2 
Only one day‟s―allowed when no change of residence is Involved  9.6 
On transfer during leave ―  9.8 
On transfer to service under another Government  9.12 
Pay of a Government employee during― 9.15 
Route by which―should ordinarily be calculated  9.7 
Rules relating to―applicable in the case of transfers from one Government 
to another to be those in force in Government to which transferred 
9.12 
When―admissible to a Government employee may be cancelled from leave 
granted     
9.8(b) 
When a relieving Government employee is regarded as on duty and not on―  
9.16, 9.17 

227 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
                                                         L 
 
Labourer (s)― 
 
A daily―in the Public Works Department if  granted leave  is not entitled to 
any leave salary 
8.146 
Grant of leave to―employed in Government workshops or other institutions 
on daily wages, who are injured while on duty 
8.146 
Leave― 
 
A Government employee on―may not accept any employment or take any 
service without obtaining previous sanction 
8.41 
A  Government  employee  on―preparatory  to  retirement,  may      accept 
appointment in Civil Departments 
  8.41A 
A Government employee recalled from―out of India to be refunded the cost 
of  passage  home  under  certain  conditions and  to  be  provided  with  a  return 
passage to India at Government expense  
8.42 
A Government employee absent after the end of―is not entitled to―salary 8.47 
A Government employee on―cannot return to duty before the expiry of the 
period of―unless permitted. 
8.43 
A  Government  employee to  be removed  from  service after  five  year‟s 
continuous absence from duty whether with or without― 
3.25 
A  Government  employee  in  foreign  service  in  India  cannot  take―or 
receive―salary until he actually quits duty and goes on― 
10.14 
A  Government  employee  on―granted  on  account  of  ill-health may  be 
required to produce a medical certificate of fitness before returning to duty 
8.44 
A  Government  employee  on  return  from―must  report  his return  to  the 
authority which granted him― 
8.45-8.46 
A Government employee who is dismissed or removed from public service if 
reinstated is entitled to count his former service for―   
8.2(b) 
A  Government  employee who  is  on  extension  of service  after  the  date  of  
retirement is entitled to earn―  
8.21(b) 
 
Amount of honorarium admissible to a Government employee who elects to 
consume―on earned―as the case may be during a period of duty out of 
India  
6.2 
An authority empowered to grant―has no power to interfere with the option 
of a Government employee to take―on full or half pay 
8.15 
An authority empowered to grant―may refuse or revoke―according  to  the 
exigencies of the public service.  
8.15 
Authorities competent to grant―other than special disability and study― 8.23 
Authority to whom application for―or extension of―should be made 8.4-8.5 
Concessions admissible to a Government employee recalled from― 8.42 
No―may be granted to temporary establishment chargeable to contingencies 
and paid on contingent bills. 
8.136 
 
Conditions  under  which  District  and  Sessions  Judges  may  prefix  or  affix 
vacation to―       
8.32 
 

228 
 
                                      INDEX  
  Rule 
Date  of  reversion  to  Government  service  of  a  Government employee who 
takes―on the conclusion of foreign service 
10.18 
Effect upon pay and allowances of combination of holidays with― 8.27-8.28 
Foreign Service counts as duty for purposes of― 8.1 
Government  employee  transferred  to  foreign  service  must  acquaint  himself 
with rules regulating his―during foreign service 
10.15 
Government employee taking―during joining time has to allow  portion of 
joining time elapsed to be included in such― 
9.4 
Grant of―to a Government employee unlikely to be fit to return to duty 8.18 
Grant of―to Assistant Legal Remembrancer    8.141 
Grant of joining time on return from―    9.1(b) 
Grant of―to a Government employee who is on an extension of service, 
during the period of his extended service    
8.21(b)  
 
―earned by service remunerated by honoraria or daily wages   8.145 
―earned by temporary and officiating Government employees 8.133―8.140 
―inadmissible  to  a  Government employee  who  is  to  be  dismissed  or 
removed from service 
            8.19 
―admissible to daily labourers in Government workshops injured while on 
duty 
8.146 
―admissible to officers engaged on contract 8.57 
―admissible to temporary establishment debitable to contingencies and paid 
on contingent bills 
8.136 
―admissible to Government employees in permanent employ 8.116-8.128 
―admissible to Government employees on deputation out  of India 8.130 
―admissible to Probationers   8.131 
―admissible to Apprentices    8.132 
―admissible to Public Prosecutors  8.142 
―admissible to Government Pleaders  8.142 
―admissible to Editor and Reporters of the Indian Law Reports 8.143  
―admissible to Departmental Sub-Registrar 8.144 
―admissible to Government employees remunerated wholly or partially by 
payment of honoraria or daily wages  
8.145-8.146 
―of a Government employee re-employed  after  superannuation  or  retiring 
pension   should   be   regulated   by   the   rules applicable   to   temporary 
Government employees 
8.2, Note 
―cannot be claimed as a right 8.15 
―is earned by duty only     8.1 
―not  necessarily  be  refused  to  a  Government  employee  permanently 
incapacitated 
8.18 
Half pay― 8.119 
Overstayal of―does not count for increment 4.9(a), Note 3 
Priority of claims to grant of―how decided 8.17 
Procedure to be followed when a Government employee is proceeding on― 8.35, 8.36 

229 
                                   INDEX  
  Rule 
Procedure on return from― 8.45-8.46 
Rules regarding joining time admissible to Government employees on return 
from 
9.8 
Rules regarding the drawal of compensatory allowance during― 5.3 to 5.5 
Rules regarding prefixing and affixing vacation to― 8.29-8.32 
Terminal―conditions on which admissible to Government employees 8.138 A 
When vacation is treated as―in the case of District and Sessions Judges 8.32, 
Exception 
Wilful  absence  from  duty  after  the  expiry  of―may   be   treated   as 
misbehaviour for the purpose of rule 3.17 
8.47 
Leave Account―  
Absence after the end of leave to be debited to the―as leave on half pay 8.47 
A―to be maintained for each Government employee  8.50 
Forms of―for Government employees  8.50 
Leave taken by a government employee in foreign service out of India not to 
be debited to his― 
10.16 
―of Government employees, by whom maintained  8.51 
Leave-Adoption 
 
Quantum of―admissible and the conditions of its grant 8.128-A 
Leave-Casual―  
A Government employee on―or quarantine  leave  is  not  treated  as  absent 
from duty 
8.60 
―is not a recognised regular leave 8.60 
Rules regulating the grant of―    8.61 
Leave-Child Care 
 
Grant of ― to a woman Government employee  8.128-B 
Leave-Commuted―  
Grant of―to a Government employee 8.119(c) 
Leave -Paternity―  
Grant of ― to a male Government employee 8.128 
Leave salary during  
 
Leave ―Disability―  
Amount of leave salary admissible during Special―    8.124 and 
8.137-C 
Conditions under   which   Special―may  be  debited  to  a  Government 
employee‟s leave account 
 8.124(1) 
Conditions under which ―may be granted to Government employees  8.124 
Conditions  under  which―may  be  granted  to  Government  employees 
disabled by accidental injury 
8.125,  
   8.137-C 
Effect  of  leave  taken  under  the  military rules  on  the  maximum  amount  of 
Special―which may be granted to a Government employee   
8.124 
Grant  of  Special―to  a  Government  employee,  who  has  contracted  such 
disability while serving with a military force 
8.124 

230 
 
                                     INDEX  
  Rule 
Government employees to whom Special―may be granted     8.124 and        
8.137-C 
Special ―to count as duty in calculating service for pension 8.124(1) 
Special―may be combined with other kinds of leave    8.124 and        
8.137-C 
Leave―Earned― 
 
Definition of― 8.113 
―may be granted during the period of extension of service after the date of 
retirement 
8.21 
―admissible  to  Government  employees  of  the  Vacation  Department  in 
respect of duty performed in any year  
8.117 
―is admissible to permanent Government employees 8.116 
―is admissible to Government employees not in permanent employ  8.133 
Leave salary admissible to permanent Government employees during― 8.122 
Leave salary admissible to temporary Government employees during― 8.140 
Leave Extraordinary― 
 
Apprentices are entitled to―      8.132(b) 
Circumstances in which―may count for increment 4.9(b) 
―may be granted in special circumstances when no other leave is by rule 
admissible  
 8.121(1) 
― admissible to temporary and officiating Government employees 8.137 
―may be granted to Assistant Legal Remembrancers 8.141 
―may be granted to Departmental Sub-Registrars  8.144(ii) 
No leave salary is admissible during―  8.122(4) 
Leave―Hospital― 
 
Combination of―with other leave  8.127 
Leave salary during―  8.127 
Not debited against the leave account    8.127 
Rules relating to―  8.127 
To whom granted      8.127 
Leave―Maternity― 
 
Combination of―with leave of any other kind .   8.127 and  
8.137-A 
Extent of―that may be granted      8.127 and 
8.137-A 
Full pay may be granted during―   8.127 and 
8.137-A 
General rules relating to―       8.127 and 
8.137-A 
―not debited against the leave account   8.127 and 
8.137-A 

231 
                                           INDEX  
  Rule 
Leave―“not due” ― 
 
Conditions under which―may be granted  8.119 
Conditions to be fulfilled before a Government employee is granted―      8.119 
―may  be  granted  to  a  Government  employee  recruited  oversea s who   is 
prevented from proceeding at once from the port of disembarkation in India to 
take up his appointment  
3.20, 
Note 
Leave salary admissible during―   8.122(2) 
 Leave on Half Pay― 
 
Absence after the expiry of leave to be treated as―for the purpose of debiting 
the leave account    
8.47 
Definition of―                   2.33 
Leave salary admissible during―or leave not due 8.122(2)  
and   8.140 
―may  be  granted  to  a  Government  employee  recruited  overseas  who  is 
prevented from proceeding from the port of disembarkation in India to take up 
his appointment   
3.20, Note 
―admissible to permanent Government employees   8.119 (a) 
 and (b) 
Leave on Medical Certificate― 
 
Certificate of fitness on return from―by whom signed  8.44(ii) 
Competent authority‟s sanction is required for―though medical certificate is 
produced  
8.16 
Form  of  medical  certificate  which  may  be  required  to  be  produced  by  a 
Government employee on return from leave granted on account of ill-health  
8.44 
Government  employee  is  not  entitled  to  any―recommended  by  a  medical 
officer unless it is due under the rules   
8.7 
In  the  case  of  Government  employees  seeking  leave  on―, the  sanctioning 
authority may require a second medical opinion by the P.M.O. or the Assistant 
Civil Surgeon  
8.13(b) 
Joining time when―is taken while in transit from one post to another is treated 
as leave   .  
9 .4 
―not  to  be  recommended  by  medical  officer  if  Government  employee  is 
unlikely to be fit to return to duty   
8.6 
 
―    to employees in Group „D‟ Service may be granted on any certificate which 
competent authority may accept 
8.14 
―to Government employee may be granted on a medical  certificate  given by  a 
registered   medical   practitioner having   a   graduate   degree   in   allopathic, 
ayurvedic or homeopathic system of medicine. 
8.13(a) 
Maximum  amount  of―admissible  to Government  employees  subject  to  the 
rules in Section III of Chapter VIII   
8.119 
Procedure in case of Government employees applying for―     8.13 
When and to what extent―may be granted to Assistant Legal Remembrancer  s 8.141 

232 
 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
Leave out of India―  
Procedure when departing on―   8.34-8.35 
Leave Quarantine―  
A Government employee on―is treated as on duty 8.60 
Rules regulating the grant of―     8.61 
Leave Rules―  
Application of  Revised― 8.52 to 8.58 
Leave Salary―  
A  daily  labourer  in  the  Public  Works  Department  if  granted leave  is  not 
entitled to any―     
8.146 
Amount of―admissible during special disability leave   8.124 
Advance―when proceeding on a minimum one month‟s earned leave  8.122(7) 
Competent authority may make rules prescribing the procedure to be followed 
in India in the payment of―   
8.48 
Definition of― 2.34 
Drawal of―    8.49 
Government employee is not entitled to―during absence after the end of leave   8.47 
Interest on overdue contributions for―while on foreign service 10.10 
―admissible to daily labourers in Government workshops injured while on 
duty     
8.146 
―admissible to temporary and officiating Government employees other than 
Temporary Engineers of the Public Works Department 
 8.140 
―admissible to permanent Government employees 8.122 
―admissible during earned leave to permanent Government employees     8.122(1) 
―admissible to permanent Government employees during half-pay leave  or 
leave not due.  
8.122(2)  
―payable by the foreign employer in the case of a Government employee on 
foreign service out of India 
10.16  
No―admissible during extraordinary leave 8.122(4) and 
     8.140 
Rate  of―due  during  voyage to  and  on  arrival  in  India  to  a Government 
employee recalled from leave out of India 
8.42(a)(iii) 
Terminal Leave-when and to what extent―is admissible 8.138-A 
Lien―  
 
A  Government  employee  on  substantive  appointment  to  a  permanent  post 
acquires a―on that post    
3.12 
A Government employee‟s―on a post in no circumstances be terminated 3.15 
The―of a Government employee shall not be terminated even with his consent   3.15 
Local Fund(s) ― 
 
Definition of―      2.36 
Government  employees  paid from―administered by Government are subject 
to these Rules     
11.1 

233 
                                            INDEX  
  Rule 
Production  of  a  medical  certificate  of  health  from  a  Government  employee 
promoted  from  non-qualifying  service  paid  from  a―to a  post  in  superior 
service under Government   
3.3, Note 1 
Treatment  of  previous  service  of  a  Government  employee  transferred  to 
Government service from a―not administered by  Government  
11.3 
                                                                       M  
Maternity Leave― 
See Leave 
―Maternity 
Medical Committee or Board―    
Leave to Government employees reported to be unfit by―  8.18 
Medical Certificate―    
By whom―may be signed for return to duty from leave on―   8.44 
Classes of Government employees exempted from production  of―of fitness    3.3 
Competent authority may require a―of fitness from a Government employee 
granted leave for reasons of health, though  not on a―     
8.44 
Form of―for return to duty from leave on account of ill-health   8.44 
Form of―prescribed for Government employees   applying for leave on― 8.13, Note 4 
Form of―of fitness required on first appointment     3.1 
For Government employees‟―by whom signed 8.13 
General rules of procedure for obtaining leave on―    8.6-8.14 
Government employees may be required to appear  in person before― for  leave 
is countersigned   
8.13(c) 
No  statement  contained in―is  evidence  of  a  claim for  leave   not otherwise 
admissible  
8.7 
Permanent unfitness of a Government employee applying for leave on―should 
be recorded in the certificate .                  
8.6 
Rules regarding―on first appointment   3.1-3.5  
Second medical opinion on the application  for  leave  on―may be secured by 
the authority competent to sanction leave                              
8.13(b) 
Though―is produced sanction to leave is necessary 8.16 
Military Officers―     
Definition of―     2.39 
Ministerial Employee(s) ―  
Definition of the term―  2.40 
Misconduct―  
Leave not to be granted to an officer who ought to be dismissed for―       8.19 
Month―      
  Calculation of― 2.41  
Example  
  Definition of the term―      2.41 
                                                                       N 
 
  Next below Rule―  
  ―benefit may be given to employees on deputation   4.13 Note 4 

234 
 
 INDEX  
  Rule 
                                                                          O 
 
   Officiate (Officiating) 
 
  A Government employee―in a post the pay of which has been fixed on a 
time-scale at a personal rate, should not be debarred from drawing increment 
in that time-scale   
4.15,  
Note 1 
  An―Government employee will draw the presumptive pay of the post      4.14 
  An―Government employee cannot draw enhanced pay unless he assumes 
duties or responsibilities of greater importance or of a different character      
4.13 
  Calculation of pay of a Government employee―in a post the pay of which 
has been fixed at a personal rate   
4.15 
Definition of―       2.42 
Fixation of the pay of a Government employee ―in a post the  pay of which 
has been prospectively reduced   
4.13,  
Note 8 
Fixation of the pay of a Government employee―in a post the pay of which 
is subject to increase upon passing of an examination or upon the completion 
of a certain period of service 
4.13 
Note 7 
Fixation of the pay of a Government employee appointed to hold or―in two 
or more independent posts 
 4.22 
―service in another post counts for increment in a post on which lien is held 
  
 4.9 (b) 
Pay of a Government employee appointed to―in a Government post  while 
in foreign service    
10.5 
Period for which an employee treated as on duty may be allowed to draw the 
pay of any―appointment held at the time he was placed on such duty     
4.3 
Power of competent authority to fix the pay of an―Government employee at 
an amount less than that admissible under the Rules  
4.16 
Rules regarding leave earned by―service  8.133 
When a Government employee holding charge of the current  duties of a post 
is said to be―in that post                    
4.23 
                                                                   P 
 
Part-time Government employees―     
Leave earned by― 8.141-8.142 
Passage―   
 
Grant of free―to a Government employee recalled from leave out of India      8.42(a)(i) 
The  Payment  of  a  return―to  India  on  the  termination  of  deputation  is 
conditional on the Government employee returning to India forthwith      
6.2, Note 5 
Patents―  
Rules regulating the  grant of permission for taking out―by Government 
employees 
5.64 
Pay― 
 
A  Government  employee  should  not  be  transferred  substantively  to  a  post 
carrying less―  
3.17 

235 
                                        INDEX  
  
Rule 
Amount  of―, joining time and―during  joining  time  of  a  Government 
employee  in  foreign  service  to  be  regulated  subject  to  restrictions  imposed 
by the competent authority.  
10.4 
An officiating  Government  employee  cannot  draw  enhanced―unless  he 
assumed  duties  or  responsibility  of  greater  importance  or  of  a  different 
character         
4.4,4.4A and 
4.13 
Circumstances  in  which―and  allowances  of  a  Government  employee 
treated as on duty can be reduced    
4.3 
Civil―admissible to civil Government employees who belong to the Army 
in India Reserve of Officers when called up for military training    
 4.3 
Date  from  which  a  Government  employee  ordinarily  begins  to draw―and 
allowances of a post  
3.19 
Date of commencement of―in case of officers recruited overseas 3.20 
  Definition of―       2.44 
Effect upon―of combination of holidays with leave and joining  time   8.27 
Fixation of―is generally within the competence of the competent  authority  4.1 
Fixation  of  the  rate  of―of  an officiating  Government  employee  at  an 
amount less than that admissible under the rules  
4.15 
Fixation  of―of a Government employees appointed to hold or officiate in 
two or more independent posts 
4.22 
Fixation of the―of a Government employee officiating in a post the―of 
which is subject to increase on passing an examination or upon completing a 
certain period of service  
4.13,  
Note 7 
Fixation of the―of a Government employee officiating in a post the―of 
which has been prospectively reduced   
4.13,  
Note 8 
Fixation of the―of a Government employee transferred from a higher to a 
lower grade or post  
4.11 
 Fixation  of  the―of  a  Government  employee  holding  a  post  the         
maximum―of which is changed with no change in the rate of increment and 
the minimum     
                   4.6,  
                    Note 3 
―of a Government employee transferred from a higher to a lower post as a    
penalty    
                   4.11 and 4.12 
―of a Government employee deputed out of  India  to  hold  a  permanent  or 
quasi-permanent post    . 
                 6.3 
―of a Government employee holding charge of the current  duties of a post 
after being relieved of those of his substantive    post    
                  4.23 
―of a Government employee appointed to hold or officiate in two or more 
independent posts at one time   
                  4.24 
―of a Government employee on course of instruction or training may be 
fixed with reference to an officiating appointment held by him  
                  4.3 
―of a Government employee will cease to be paid by the foreign employer 
from the date of reversion    
                  10.19 
―of  a  Government  employee  appointed  to  officiate  in  Government  post 
while on foreign service  
                 10.5 

236 
 
                                      INDEX  
  
Rule 
―In  foreign  service  not  taken  into  account  in  regulating  the―of  a 
Government employee appointed to officiate in a Government post while on 
foreign service    
                 10.5 
―admissible to Government employee during joining time                  9.15 
―and allowance of a Government employee deputed out of India                6.2 
―and allowances of a Government employee reinstated after suspension or 
dismissal   
               7.3 
The holder of a post of which the―is changed to be treated so as if he is 
transferred to a new post     
               4.6 
The―of a Government employee should not be increased so  as to    exceed 
the pay sanctioned for the post   
                4.1 
Pay―Initial― 
 
Rules  regarding  the  fixation  of―of  a  Government  employee appointed 
substantively to a post on a time-scale of pay  
                 4.4-4.6 
Pay―Personal― 
 
Definition of― 2.47          2.47 
―a competent authority may in certain circumstances grant―and  special 
pay. 
                  4.1(2) 
―is treated as pay   2.44(b) 
―to be ordinarily reduced or to cease on the grant of increase of pay.             4.18 
Principles to be observed for the grant of―  4.1, Note 3 
Pay―Presumptive― 
 
An officiating Government employee will draw the―of the post or the―of 
his substantive post     
4.14 
Definition of―of a post    2.48 
Pay―Special― 
 
Definition of―       2.52 
Inter-dependence of and compensatory allowance not recognised     2.52, 
Explanation 
―is treated as pay    2.44 (b) 
―is not included in presumptive pay unless certain conditions are fulfilled                      2.48 
Reasons for grant of―to be recorded in sanctioning orders . 2.52, Note 1 
―to be counted towards pension with effect from 4-9-1973 in     the  case  of 
officials   on   deputation   from   the   Punjab   Government   to   the   Central 
Government and vice versa   
10.23 Note 1 
Pay―Substantive― 
 
  Definition of―       2.55 
Fixation of―of a Government employee appointed substantively to  a  post 
on a time-scale of pay which has been reduced   
4.5 
―includes increment   accrued   to   a   Government   employee   on date   of 
promotion to a higher scale of pay   
4.4(c),  
Note 1 

237 
                                        INDEX  
  
Rule 
―includes pay drawn by a probationer in a post to which he is appointed on 
probation     
2.55,  
Note 1 
Pay―Time-Scale―  
Fixation of initial pay in a post on a―    4.4-4.6 
Except as provided in sub-rule (1) of rule 4.1, all duty in a―of pay counts for 
increments in that scale 
4.9, 4.1(1) 
Pension― 
 
A Government employee in foreign service not to accept―or gratuity from 
the foreign employer    
10.6 
Definition of―      2.45 
Interest on overdue contribution for―while on foreign service .  10.10 
Period― 
 
―of deputation  10.25 
―of deputation on foreign service to bodies which are not under the direct or 
indirect control of the Punjab Government . 
10.28(3) 
Piece Work― 
 
A press employee paid under the―system is not entitled to any leave salary 
during his absence     
8.146 
Post (s) ―  
A Government employee holding charge of current duties of a―after being 
relieved of those of his substantive―is treated as officiating in that― 
 4.23 
Fixation  of  pay  of  a  Government  employee  appointed  to  hold  or officiate  in 
two or more independent―at one time 
4.22 
Post(s) Permanent―   
A Government employee appointed to a―should produce medical certificate 
of health      
3.1 
Definition of―       2.46 
Post(s) Temporary― 
 
 Creation of―necessary for a Government  employee  on  special  duty  or  on 
deputation in India    
4.21, 
 Note 1 
Definition of―       2.58 
Determination  of  the  pay  of  person  not  already  in  Government  service 
appointed to a―   
4.20 
Principles  to  be  followed  in  fixing  the  pay  of  a Government  employee 
appointed to a―     
4.21 
Service in another―counts for increment in a time-scale  4.9(b) 
Transfer  to  foreign  service  of  a  Government  employee  holding  a―is 
permissible      
10.3(b) 
Premature Increment(s)   ―       See      
      Increment 
Probationer(s) ―      
Definition of―     2.49 
  Leave earned by―       8.131 

238 
 
                                         INDEX  
  Rule 
The status of a―is to be considered as having the attributes of a substantive 
status      
2.49, 
Note 1 
Pay of a Government employee appointed as a―   4.5-A 
Project Allowance― 
 
―admissible in a Project Area may be drawn in addition to  the  deputation 
allowance     
10.21(3) 
Provident Fund 
 
A Government employee may be required to subscribe to a― 3.18 
Public Conveyance―   
Definition of the term―     2.50 
Public Prosecutor(s) ―  
 
Rules regarding grant of leave and leave salary admissible to―  8.142 
Punishment and Appeals―      
Competent authority may issue rules 14.9 
                                                                      R 
 
Recall from Leave― 
 
Concessions admissible to―Government employee recalled from leave     8.42 
Government  employee  recalled  from  leave  out  of  India  to  be  refunded  the 
cost of his passage home and to be provided with a return passage to India at 
Government expense  
 8.42 
Record of Service― 
 
Form of―laid down by Comptroller and Auditor-General  12.1 
―of  Government employees   12.2 to 12.4 
Reduce―(Reduction) ― 
 
Cases in which the pay of a Government employee can be― 4.3, 4.11 and 
4.16 
―to be noted in service books    12.2 
Removal― 
 
 Leave  not to be  granted to a Government employee whose―from service  is 
the subject of enquiry      
8.19 
Rent― 
 
Amount of―to be charged to a Government employee not entitled to rent-
free accommodation who occupies a residence meant  for free occupation   
5.45,  
Note 2 
Assessment  of―on  Government  residences  in  an  area  at  a  uniform 
percentage of emoluments   
5.30 
Calculation of standard―of Government residences   5.23 
Capital cost of a residence for the assessment of―  5.15 
Cases in which a competent authority may waive or reduce the amount of―to 
be recovered from a Government employee   
5.35, 
 Note 1 
Competent authority may waive or reduce the amount of―to be recovered on 
Government residences or grant accommodation free of―   
5.35 

239 
                                       INDEX  
  Rule 
Concession  in―allowed  when  a  portion  of  Government  residence  or  of 
privately-owned buildings is set apart for visitors, police guards, etc.      
5.31 to 5.42 
Determination  of  the  allowance  in  the  calculation  of  the  standard―of  a 
leased residence for meeting the charges on Government. 
5.23 
Emoluments taken into account for the purpose of recovering―for residences 
supplied by Government  
5.33 
For sanitary, water-supply and electric installations to be charged  at 4
1
/
2
 per 
cent on capital cost for maintenance   
5.28(3) 
Government employees in receipt of compensatory allowance on   account   of 
dearness  of  living  may  be  assessed―in  excess  of 5 per   cent   of   his 
emoluments 
5.30(ii)(3) 
Government employee to  whom a  residence is allotted is responsible  for the 
recovery of―during the period of allotment 
5.34 
Municipal taxes payable by occupant leviable in addition to―  5.23 Note 1 
Notice of increase in―should be given to the tenant                 5.24,  Note1 
Rates of interest laid down for calculating the standard―of  residences   5.23 
Recalculation of standard―of residence  5.24 
Recovery  in  addition  to―on  buildings  of  additional―for  furniture,  tennis 
court, garden and water charges     
5.44 
Reduction of―of residences when permissible 5.35, Note 1   
5.39 and 5.41 
―for  water-supply,  sanitary  and  electric   installations   to  be  charged  in 
addition to the―of building    
5.22 
―chargeable from the date of occupation in the case of buildings occupied 
prior to the closing of the accounts 
5.25 
―to  be  charged  in  the  case  of  a  Government  employee  supplied  with  a 
residence of a higher class    
5.31 
―to be charged in the case of sub-letting of an allotted residence       5.50 
―to  be  recovered  from  the  temporary  tenant  not  to  be  less  than 
2
/
3
rd
 of 
standard―      
5.50,  
Note 2 
―to be recovered monthly in arrears for the period of allotment.   5.34 
Repairs  necessitated  by  calamities  not  included  in  calculation  of―of 
residential buildings      
5.27 
Responsibility for―in the case of making or taking over charge of office 
where the occupation of the residence is a condition of the tenure      
5.49 
 Rules regarding the recovery of―for residences supplied by Government     5.29-5.34 
Rent-free Quarters― 
 
Competent authority may grant―to any Government employee or class of 
Government employees   
5.35 (a) 
Certain Government employees of the Forest Department not entitled to―are 
permitted to occupy quarters meant for free occupation on payment of rent     
5.45, Note 3 
Grant of the concession of ―to Government employees in various  
departments  
5.35, Note 3 

240 
 
                                          INDEX  
  Rule 
―does not carry with if free supply of water and electric energy     5.36 
When a Government employee is supplied―the exemption for the payment 
of rent should be considered as complete  
5.36 
When  a building  which  is  ordinarily  to  be  occupied  by  a  Government 
employee entitled to―is occupied by a Government employee not entitled 
to―the latter shall be charged rent in accordance with the rules    
5.45,  
Note 2 
Repairs― 
 
Classification of―to residential buildings as ordinary and special       5.27 
Percentage  of  cost  to be  assessed  for  ordinary  and  special―of  residential 
buildings   
5.28 
Rent for sanitary, water-supply, and electric installations to be charged at 4
1
/
2
 
per cent on capital cost for maintenance and― 
5.28(3) 
 ―necessitated by calamities not included in calculation of rent of residential 
buildings   
5.27(i) 
 ―to residential buildings leased by Government, charges on maintenance 
and―how to be dealt with for calculating the standard rent   
5.23 
―Shall  not  include  any  charges  on  account  of  Establishment  and  Tools  and 
Plant except up to the extent allowed  
5.23, Note 3 
Where  office  accommodation  is  provided  in  an  officer‟s  residence,  cost 
of―to remainder to be separately estimated  
5.39 
Residence(s) ― 
 
                      Accommodation  for  reception  of  visitors  and  quarters  for  police  guard 
attached to  a―supplied  to  an official  not  to  be  taken  into  account for 
calculating standard rent                   
5.40 
All  powers  exercised  by  certain offices of  the  Public  Works  Department 
over―under  their  control  are  also  exercised  by  officers  of  the  Forest 
Department over―under the control of  the latter       
 5.52 
Classes of Government buildings intended for occupation as―  5.45 
                      Concessions admissible to officers hiring directly privately-owned  buildings 
when  they provide suitable accommodation for visitor or for police guard 
5.42 
Constant changes in the accommodation to be set apart for visitors in a―are 
depreciated on principle    
5.43 
Determination  of  the  period  of  allotment  of―occupied  by  Government 
employees      
5.48 
Government employees, whom a―is allotted are responsible for the recovery 
of the rent     
5.34 
How to calculate the value of the―and of the site when the present value of 
both is unknown    
5.17 
Period of allotment of a―occupied by Government employees  5.48(a) 
Re-calculation of the standard rent of―on account of minor additions and 
alterations    
5.24 
Recovery of full standard rent from a Government employee with a―of a 
higher class    
 5.31 

241 
                                       INDEX  
  Rule 
Recovery of rent from Government employee supplied with―in more than 
one station or who occupy―for a part of the year only    
5.32 
                      Reduction of rents of―when permissible .   5.35, Note 1           
 5.38 and 5.41 
Renewals of portions of a―damaged by calamities, how dealt with                                  5.20 
Repairs  necessitated  by  calamities  not taken  into  account  as  a  basis  for  the 
revision of the rent of ― 
5.27(i) 
Rules regarding recovery of additional rent for furniture, tennis  court,   garden 
and water charges provided in a―   
5.44 
Rules regarding the provision of and recovery of rent  5.13-5.52 
What action is required when a Government―is vacated during a 12 months‟ 
tenancy   
5.49 
When a Government employee is not considered in occupation  of a―   5.47 
When a―constructed for the incumbent of a particular  post  may  be  let  to  a 
Government  employee  who  does  not  hold that  post  and  subject  to  what 
conditions    
5.50 Note 2 
Where office  accommodation is provided in an officer‟s―capital cost and 
repairs of remainder to be separately estimated .  
5.39 
Retirement 
 
Applicability    of    Foreign    Service    Rules    to    Government    employees      
accepting foreign employment while on leave preparatory to― 
10.5 
Grant of leave encashment  to a Government employee after the date of his―    8.21 
Rules regarding―     3.26, 3.27 
Terms granted to officer on appointment in civil department during leave 
preparatory to― 
8.41 
Return to Duty― 
 
A  Government  employee  on  leave  granted  on  account  of  ill-health  though 
technically leave on medical certificate may be required to produce a medical 
certificate of fitness before reporting his― 
8.44 
A Government employee must report his―from leave 8.45 
Government employees must await orders of posting on―from leave    8.46 
Government employee suffering from tuberculosis may be allowed  to―on 
the basis of fitness certificate which recommends light   work for him 
8.44,  
Note  
Procedure to be followed for the grant of leave to a Government employee 
who is unlikely to be fit to―    
8.18 
Revaluation of residences― 
 
―may be authorised of all residence of a specified class or within a specified 
area 
5.18 
Reward(s) 
 
Circumstances  in  which  a  Government  employee  is  eligible  to  Receive 
a―without special permission    
5.63 
Route(s) 
 
By which joining time is calculated     9.7 

242 
 
                                         INDEX  
  Rule 
 Rules 
 
Classes of Government employees to whom  Punjab Civil Services―apply      1.2 
Classes of Government employees to whom the Punjab Civil Services ―do 
not apply      
1.4 
In  cases  of  doubt, authority  competent  to  decide  whether the  `Punjab  Civil 
Services―apply to any person or not   
1.5 
Nothing in the Punjab Civil Services―shall operate to deprive any person of 
any right to which he is entitled under any law     
1.6 
―under  which  pay,  travelling  allowance  and  pension  of  a  Government 
employee shall be regulated 
1.7 
            S 
 
   Section writer(s)― 
 
A―paid  under  the  piece  work  system  is  not  entitled  to  any  leave  Salary 
during his absence   
8.146 
Service(s) ― 
 
A Government employee on leave is not permitted to take any―or accept any 
employment without obtaining previous sanction     
8.41 
A  Government  employee  discharged  from  public―,  if  re-employed  may 
count his previous―for leave   
8.2 
 Circumstances  under  which  the  previous―of  a  Government  employee 
reinstated after dismissal or removal may count for  Leave     
8.2(b) 
Condition on which―counts for increment in a time-scale 4.9 
Previous―in  a  local  fund  not administered  by  Government  of  a  person 
transferred to Government services does not count as duty    
11.3 
Rules regarding leave earned by temporary and officiating―         8.133 and 
8.136 
Rules regarding leave earned by part time―or remunerated wholly or partly 
by fees  
8.141 
Service Book(s)― 
 
A record of allocation of leave necessary to be kept in―of a Government 
employee transferred to another Government  
12.2 
Custody of―    12.2(4) 
Entries in―to be made and attested regularly                                  12.2(1) 
Government employee responsible for proper maintenance of his―   12.3 
Government employees who are and who are not required to  keep―  12.1 
Periods of suspensions, leave, etc., to be entered in―and attested   12.2(1) 
―of a Government employee transferred to foreign service to be sent  to  the 
Head of Department or Office     
12.4(2) 
Service Roll(s)―  
 
Cases in which―are kept     12.1 
Particulars to be entered in―     12.2 
Checking and attestation of entries in―    12.2 

243 
                                       INDEX  
  Rule 
Special Duty― 
 
A temporary post to be created for the performance of―  4.21, Note 1 
                        ―not recognised under the Civil Services Rules  4.21, Note 1 
S Special Pay― See 
Pay―Special 
Specialist Service (s)― 
 
―consist of 14.6 
Sphere of Duty―  
A Government employee is not treated as on duty during any time he may 
spend beyond his―except under certain circumstances  
Paragraph II 
of Schedule 
to 
Chapter 11 
Definition of― 
2.53 
Standard Rent― 
 
Accommodation for visitors and Police guard provided in a  residence 
supplied to an officer not to be taken into account  for calculating―  
5.40 
Calculating of―   5.23 
Cost  of  Electric  meters  when  supplied  by Government  not  to  be  taken  into 
account in calculating―  
5.22,  
Note 2 
Circumstances under which―of a residence can be recalculated on account of 
minor additions and alteration    
5.24 
 Expenditure  on  compound  walls,  fences,  gates,  roads  and  culverts  within  a 
compound to be included in the capital cost for assessment of―                                                                                
5.16 (ii) 
Full―to be charged from a Government employee provided with  a residence 
of a higher class     
5.31 
Rates of interest laid down for the calculation of―   5.23 
Recalculation of―of a residence      5.24 
Student― 
 
Date from which―entitled to be appointed to Government   service on passing 
through a course of training is considered   as on duty     
Paragraph 
I(iv) of 
Schedule to 
Chapter II 
Study Leave― 
 
―may be granted on such terms as the competent authority may prescribe      8.126 
―not to be debited against the leave account                8.126 
Subsistence Grant― 
 
Amount of―admissible to Government employees    7.2 
Circumstances in which―may be made    7.2 
Definition of―                                                                                                2.54 
 Government employees under suspension are entitled to― 7.2 (b) 
Substantive Appointment― 
 
A Government employee on―to a permanent post acquires a lien on that post   3.12 

244 
 
                                       INDEX  
  Rule 
Rules for the fixation of the pay on―to a post    4.4 
Sunday(s) 
 
                        ―can be prefixed or affixed to leave  8.26 
S Suspension―  
                      A Government employee under―is entitled to a subsistence  grant    7.2  
                      Leave may not be granted to Government employee under―   7.4 
                      Mounted Police Officers placed under―cease to draw horse, pony or camel 
allowance  
7.2,  
Note 1 
                      Mounted Police Officers on reinstatement are not entitled conveyance 
allowance for the period of―  
7.3-B,  
Note 1 
      Pay and allowances of a Government employee re-instated after―  
dismissal or compulsory retirement  
7.3 
                   Rule 7.4 does not debar the conversion of the period of―into one of leave      7.3, Note 2 
                        ―to be noted in the service book    12.2 
Treatment as duty of the period a Government employee was under―when 
subsequently re-instated  
7.3(3) & 
 7.3-B (4) 
T Tenure Posts―   
  Definition of―        2.59 
Time Scale(s)― 
 
Circumstances under which two―of pay are said to be identical    2.60 (b) 
Circumstances under which a post is said to be on the same―as another     2.60(c) 
Definition of the term―      2.60 
Fixation of initial pay in a post on a―of  pay   4.4-4.6 
Training― 
 
A Government  employee  following  out  a  duly  authorised  course  of―is 
treated as on duty  
Paragraph 
1(i) of 
Schedule to       
 Chapter II 
Acting   promotion   authorised   in   the   place   of   Government employees 
following a duly authorised course of―or instruction 
4.17, Note 
Joining  time  admissible  to  a  Government  employee  before  and  after  the 
period of―    
  9.1. Note 3 
Leave to be granted to teachers undergoing―   Schedule to     
 Chapter II 
Time spent in course of instruction or―may be treated as duty.   Schedule to     
 Chapter II 
When teachers not to be treated on duty while under―   Schedule to         
 Chapter II       
 Exception 
Transfer(s) ― 
 
A Government employee shall not be transferred from a post carrying higher 
pay to a post on less pay except in certain  circumstances      
3.17 (a) 

245 
                                       INDEX  
  Rule 
Calculation of joining time to a Government employee on―to a new post 
involving change of station   
9.5 
Cases in which a relieving Government employee may draw the ordinary pay 
and allowances of his new post before―is complete 
9.16 
Definition of the term―    2.61 
Drawal of compensatory allowances during temporary―   5.3 
Drawal of house-rent allowance during temporary―     5.5 
Government employee on―during a vacation may take joining time at the 
end of Vacation    
9.3 
Joining time to a Government employee on―to a new post not involving 
change of station      
9.6 
No  extra pay can be drawn by a relieving Government employee  until the― 
of the whole charge is complete   
9.16 
Particulars  to  be  entered  in  the  service  book  of  a  Government  employee 
on―to foreign service    
12.4 
Pay and allowances, how to be dealt with when―of charge  takes several days                          9.16-9.17 
Rules regarding ―of charge by Government employee .  3.22-3.24 
Definition of temporary―   5.2(b) 
When Government employee on temporary―may draw house-rent allowance   5.5 
When―involves taking over of moneys combination of holidays with leave 
and joining time requires special sanction 
3.23, 3.24, 
8.28 
When medical certificate of fitness required on―to another office 3.5 
Transit― 
Joining  time  of  a  Government  employee appointed  to  a  new  post  while 
in―from one post to another  
9.11 
Joining time of a Government employee taking leave while in―from one post 
to another is included in his leave   
9.4 
Travelling Allowance― 
 
Definition of the term―   2.62 
―admissible for a journey  performed  by  a  Government  employee  recalled 
from leave in India  
8.42 
―is included in the term compensatory allowance   2.13 
―to be regulated by the rules in force at the time journey is performed     1.7 
Tuition Fees― 
 
Amount of―how calculated in applying powers of sanction . 5.60 
                                                      U 
 
Unfit to return to Duty― 
 
Grant of leave to Government employee reported to be ― 8.18 
Medical  officers  should  not  recommend  leave  on  medical  certificate for a 
Government employee likely to be― 
8.6 
Maximum amount of leave that can be specially granted to a Government 
employee found   ― 
8.18(c) 
When leave may be granted to a Government employee likely to be―      8.18 

246 
 
                                         INDEX  
  Rule 
                                              V 
Vacation(s) ― 
 
A  Government  employee  transferred  during―may  be  permitted  to  take 
joining time at the end of―   
 9.3 
Competent authority may prescribe the conditions under which a Government 
employee may be considered to have availed himself of a―    
8.59 
Conditions under which District & Sessions Judges may prefix or affix―to 
leave   
8.32 
Joining time admissible when―is combined with leave   9.3 
Rules regarding prefixing or affixing of―to leave by Government employees 
in Vacation Department   
8.29-8.32 
When―is treated as leave     8.59 
When―is combined with leave the rule that both the relieving and relieved 
Government employees should be present to make over charge of office is not 
enforced   
8.30-8.31 
When―is treated as leave in the case of District and Sessions  Judges     8.32 
Vacation Department― 
Competent authority may decide who serves in―  8.59 
Vaccination― 
 
Every  Government  employee shall  get  himself  vaccinated  or  revaccinated 
when so required by general or special orders 
3.9 
Woman― 
 
A―Government employee may be granted adoption leave 8.128-A 
A―Government employee  may be granted Child Care Leave  8.128-B 
 
 
 
  